A Project
Manager’s
Book of Forms

A Project
Manager’s
Book of Forms
Third Edition
A Companion to the PMBOK® Guide –
Sixth Edition
Cynthia Snyder Dionisio

Cover image: Abstract Background: © strizh-/iStockphoto
Color Wind Rose: © LongQuattro/iStockphoto
Cover design: Wiley
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Copyright © 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section
107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or
authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to
the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River
Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in preparing this
book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of
this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No
warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies
contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate.
Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom.
For general information about our other products and services, please contact our Customer Care Department within
the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material included with
standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to
media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may download this material at
http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Names: Snyder Dionisio, Cynthia, 1962- author.
Title: A project manager’s book of forms : a companion to the PMBOK guide –
sixth edition / Cynthia Snyder.
Description: Third edition. | Hoboken, New Jersey : John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
[2017] | Includes index. |
Identifiers: LCCN 2017016425 (print) | LCCN 2017029983 (ebook) | ISBN
ISBN 9781119393986 (pbk.) | 9781119393993 (pdf) | ISBN 9781119394006 (epub)
Subjects: LCSH: Project management—Forms.
Classification: LCC HD69.P75 (ebook) | LCC HD69.P75 S689 2017 (print) | DDC
658.4/04—dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017016425
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Contents

Acknowledgments

vii

Introduction
New for this Edition
Audience
Organization

ix
ix
ix
x

1

Initiating Forms
1.0 Initiating Process Group / 1
1.1 Project Charter / 2
1.2 Assumption Log / 9
1.3 Stakeholder Register / 12
1.4 Stakeholder Analysis / 15

1

2

Planning Forms
17
2.0 Planning Process Group / 17
2.1 Project Management Plan / 20
2.2 Change Management Plan / 25
2.3 Project Roadmap / 28
2.4 Scope Management Plan / 30
2.5 Requirements Management
Plan / 33
2.6 Requirements
Documentation / 37
2.7 Requirements Traceability
Matrix / 40
2.8 Project Scope Statement / 45
2.9 Work Breakdown Structure / 49
2.10 WBS Dictionary / 52
2.11 Schedule Management Plan / 56
2.12 Activity List / 59
2.13 Activity Attributes / 62

2.14
2.15
2.16
2.17
2.18
2.19
2.20
2.21
2.22
2.23
2.24
2.25
2.26
2.27
2.28
2.29
2.30
2.31
2.32
2.33
2.34
2.35
2.36
2.37

Milestone List / 65
Network Diagram / 67
Duration Estimates / 70
Duration Estimating
Worksheet / 73
Project Schedule / 78
Cost Management Plan / 82
Cost Estimates / 85
Cost Estimating Worksheet / 88
Cost Baseline / 93
Quality Management Plan / 95
Quality Metrics / 99
Responsibility Assignment
Matrix / 101
Resource Management
Plan / 104
Team Charter / 109
Resource Requirements / 113
Resource Breakdown
Structure / 116
Communications Management
Plan / 118
Risk Management Plan / 121
Risk Register / 128
Risk Report / 131
Probability and Impact
Assessment / 137
Probability and Impact
Matrix / 142
Risk Data Sheet / 144
Procurement Management
Plan / 147

vi    Contents
2.38
2.39
2.40

Procurement Strategy / 152
Source Selection Criteria / 155
Stakeholder Engagement
Plan / 158

3 Executing Forms
163
3.0 Executing Process Group / 163
3.1 Issue Log / 165
3.2 Decision Log / 168
3.3 Change Request / 170
3.4 Change Log / 175
3.5 Lessons Learned Register / 178
3.6 Quality Audit / 181
3.7 Team Performance
Assessment / 184
4 Monitoring and Controlling Forms 189
4.0 Monitoring and Controlling Process
Group / 189
4.1 Team Member Status
Report / 191
4.2 Project Status Report / 196

4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9

Variance Analysis / 202
Earned Value Analysis / 206
Risk Audit / 209
Contractor Status Report / 213
Procurement Audit / 218
Contract Closeout Report / 222
Product Acceptance
Form / 226

5

Closing
229
5.0 Closing Process Group / 229
5.1 Lessons Learned Summary / 229
5.2 Project or Phase Closeout / 235

6

Agile
6.1 Product Vision / 240
6.2 Product Backlog / 242
6.3 Release Plan / 244
6.4 Retrospective / 246

Index

239

249

acknowledgments

It was an honor to have chaired the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. My first thanks goes to John Zlockie,
PMI Standards Manager, for letting me chair the Sixth Edition. I am so very grateful to Kristin Vitello,
Standards Specialist extraordinaire, for being so wonderfully supportive during the entire process. The
experience of chairing the Sixth Edition was so rich because of the amazing team of people with whom
I worked. I was so honored to have the amazing Dr. David Hillson as my Vice Chair. I am very thankful
for his sage guidance and warm friendship. My team was more than I could have hoped for: Mercedes
Martinez Sanz, Alejandro Romero Torres, Larkland Brown, Pan Kao, Guy Schleffer, Lynda Bourne, and
Gwen Whitman. Frank Parth was with us for a time and his contributions are appreciated. A special place
is in our hearts for Michael J. Stratton, who made an incredible difference throughout his life to both the
profession and the Sixth Edition. Mike, you are missed.
A huge thank you to my husband Dexter Dionisio for supporting me in the Sixth Edition and in all my
writing endeavors. Your support means so much to me.
Thank you to Margaret Cummins. You are such a delight to work with. I always look forward to our
times together. I feel so fortunate to work with the fabulous professionals Lauren Olesky, Kalli Schultea,
Lauren Freestone, Kerstin Nasdeo, and all the wonderful folks at Wiley. I think the look, feel, and usability of
the third edition of the Book of Forms will be such an improvement over previous editions. I appreciate the
hard work on both the paper and electronic forms.
I appreciate Donn Greenberg, Barbara Walsh, Amy Goretsky, and Roberta Storer for the work you all
do to support this book and the other publications we work on together. I am looking forward to the electronic spinoffs for the forms and I appreciate your support with that project!
Thank you to all the students, project managers, and others around the world who have purchased
previous editions of this and my other books.

Introduction

A Project Manager’s Book of Forms is designed to be a companion to A Guide to the Project Management
Body of Knowledge (PMBOK® Guide) – Sixth Edition. The purpose is to present the information from the
PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition in a set of forms so that project managers can readily apply the concepts
and practices described in the PMBOK® Guide to their projects.
The PMBOK® Guide identifies that subset of the project management body of knowledge generally
recognized as good practice. It does not describe how to apply those practices, nor does it provide a
vehicle for transferring that knowledge into practice.
This Book of Forms will assist project managers in applying information presented in the PMBOK®
Guide to project documentation. The Book of Forms does not teach project management concepts or
describe how to apply project management techniques. Textbooks and classes can fulfill those needs.
This book provides an easy way to apply good practices to projects.

nEW FOr tHIS EDItIOn
There are several added features for this edition of the Book of Forms. Since one of the defining factors
about projects is that they are unique, project managers must tailor the forms and reports to meet the
needs of their individual projects. Some projects will require information in addition to what is presented in
these forms; some will require less. For each form there is a section that suggests some things to consider
for tailoring the form. These forms are presented in paper format and electronic versions to make them
easy to adapt to the needs of specific projects. The electronic version is in PDF and .doc format. The .doc
format is easy to tailor to suit your needs.
Another section describes the other forms that should be checked for alignment. For example, duration estimates should be aligned with relevant assumptions in the Assumption Log, information in activity
attributes, and resource requirements.
Because agile practices are becoming common on projects, even on projects that have not adapted
an agile development methodology, we have included a few agile forms. These are not mentioned in the
PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition, but we think they might be helpful.

aUDIEnCE
This book is written specifically for project managers to help manage all aspects of the project. Those
new to project management can use the forms as a guide in collecting and organizing project information.
Experienced project managers can use the forms as a template so that they collect a set of consistent
data on all projects. In essence, the forms save reinventing the wheel for each project.
A secondary audience is the manager of project managers or a project management office. Using the
information in this book ensures a consistent approach to project documentation. Adopting these forms on
an organizational level will enable a repeatable approach to project management.

x   Introduction

Organization
The forms are organized by Process Group: Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and
Closing. Within those Process Groups, the forms are arranged sequentially as presented in the PMBOK®
Guide – Sixth Edition. Agile forms are after the closing forms in their own section.
Most form descriptions follow this format:
• A description of each form is presented along with a list of contents. For the planning forms, there is
a description of where the information in the form comes from (inputs) and where it goes to (outputs).
• Tailoring. A section that presents information you can consider to help you tailor the forms to fit your
needs.
• Alignment. This section presents related forms that you will want to make sure are aligned.
• Description. A table that identifies each of the fields in the form along with a brief explanation.
• A blank copy of the form.
There have been some requests for completed samples of each form. Due to the unique nature of
projects and because this book is meant to span all industries and be used by a wide audience, it is not
practical to provide examples of completed forms. However, in this current edition we have provided a few
samples of filled-out forms so you can see how they would look. These forms are available on the website
listed below.
Not all forms will be needed on all projects. Use the forms you need, to the degree that you need
them, to assist you in managing your projects.
For electronic copies of the forms, and to see the filled-out examples, go to http://www.wiley.com/go/
bookofforms3e.

Initiating Forms

1

1.0 InItIatIng Process grouP
The purpose of the Initiating Process Group is to authorize a project, provide a high-level definition of the
project, and identify stakeholders. There are two processes in the Initiating Process Group:
• Develop project charter
• Identify stakeholders
The intent of the Initiating Process Group is to at least:
• Authorize a project
• Identify project objectives
• Define the initial scope of the project
• Obtain organizational commitment
• Assign a project manager
• Identify project stakeholders
As the first processes in the project, the initiating processes are vital to starting a project effectively.
These processes can be revisited throughout the project for validation and elaboration as needed.
The forms used to document initiating information include:
• Project charter
• Assumption log
• Stakeholder register
• Stakeholder analysis
These forms are consistent with the information in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. Tailor them to
meet the needs of your project by editing, combining, or revising them.

2   Initiating Forms

1.1 Project Charter
The project charter is a document that formally authorizes a project or phase. The project charter defines
the reason for the project and assigns a project manager and his or her authority level for the project. The
contents of the charter describe the project in high-level terms, such as:
• Project purpose
• High-level project description
• Project boundaries
• Key deliverables
• High-level requirements
• Overall project risk
• Project objectives and related success criteria
• Summary milestone schedule
• Preapproved financial resources
• Key stakeholder list
• Project approval requirements
• Project exit criteria
• Assigned project manager, responsibility, and authority level
• Name and authority of the sponsor or other person(s) authorizing the project charter
The project charter can receive information from:
• Agreements (contracts)
• Statements of work
• Business case
• Benefits management plan
It provides information to:
• Stakeholder register
• Project management plan
• Scope management plan
• Requirements management plan
• Requirements documentation
• Requirements traceability matrix
• Project scope statement
• Schedule management plan
• Cost management plan
• Quality management plan
• Resource management plan
• Communications management plan
• Risk management plan
• Procurement management plan
• Stakeholder engagement plan
The project charter is an output from process 4.1 Develop Project Charter in the PMBOK® Guide –
Sixth Edition. This document is developed once and is not usually changed unless there is a significant
change in the environment, scope, schedule, resources, budget, or stakeholders.

Initiating Forms   3  
Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help you tailor the project charter to meet your needs:
• Combine the project charter with the project scope statement, especially if your project is small
• If you are doing the project under contract you can use the statement of work as the project charter
in some cases

Alignment
The project charter should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Business case
• Project scope statement
• Milestone schedule
• Budget
• Stakeholder register
• Risk register

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 1.1 to assist you in developing a project charter.
Table 1.1 Elements of a Project Charter
Document Element

Description

Project purpose

The reason the project is being undertaken. May refer to a business
case, the organization’s strategic plan, external factors, a contract
agreement, or any other reason for performing the project.

High-level project description

A summary-level description of the project.

Project boundaries

Limits to the project scope. May include scope exclusions, or other
limitations.

Key deliverables

The high-level project and product deliverables. These will be further
elaborated in the project scope statement.

High-level requirements

The high-level conditions or capabilities that must be met to satisfy the
purpose of the project. Describe the product features and functions
that must be present to meet stakeholders’ needs and expectations.
These will be further elaborated in the requirements documentation.

Overall project risk

An assessment of the overall riskiness of the project. Overall risk can
include the underlying political, social, economic, and technological
volatility, uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity. It pertains to the
stakeholder exposure to variations in the project outcome.

Project objectives and related success
criteria

Project objectives are usually established for at least scope, schedule,
and cost. The success criteria identify the metrics or measurements
that will be used to measure success.
There may be additional objectives as well. Some organizations
include quality, safety, and stakeholder satisfaction objectives.
(continued)

4   Initiating Forms
Table 1.1 Elements of a Project Charter (continued)
Document Element

Description

Summary milestone schedule

Significant events in the project. Examples include the completion of
key deliverables, the beginning or completion of a project phase, or
product acceptance.

Preapproved financial resources

The amount of funding available for the project. May include sources
of funding and annual funding limits.

Key stakeholder list

An initial, high-level list of people or groups that have influenced or can
influence project success, as well as those who are influenced by its
success. This can be further elaborated in the stakeholder register.

Project exit criteria

The performance, metrics, conditions, or other measurements that
must be met to conclude the project.

Assigned project manager, responsibility,
and authority level

The authority of the project manager with regard to staffing, budget management and variance, technical decisions, and conflict
resolution.
Examples of staffing authority include the power to hire, fire, discipline,
accept, or not accept project staff.
Budget management refers to the authority of the project manager
to commit, manage, and control project funds. Variance refers to the
variance level that requires escalation.
Technical decisions describe the authority of the project manager to
make technical decisions about deliverables or the project approach.
Conflict resolution defines the degree to which the project manager
can resolve conflict within the team, within the organization, and with
external stakeholders.

Name and authority of the sponsor or other
person(s) authorizing the project charter

The name, position, and authority of the person who oversees the
project manager for the purposes of the project. Common types of
authority include the ability to approve changes, determine acceptable
variance limits, resolve inter-project conflicts, and champion the project at a senior management level.

PROJECT CHARTER
Project title:
Project sponsor:

Date Prepared:

Project manager:

Project customer:

Project Purpose:

high-level Project Description:

Project boundaries:

key Deliverables:

high-level requirements:

overall Project risk

Page 1 of 4

PROJECT CHARTER
Project objectives

success criteria

summary milestones

Due Date

scope:

time:

cost:

other:

Page 2 of 4

PROJECT CHARTER
Preapproved Financial resources:

stakeholder(s)

role

Project exit criteria:

Project manager authority level:
staffing Decisions:

budget management and Variance:

Page 3 of 4

PROJECT CHARTER
technical Decisions:

conflict resolution:

sponsor authority:

approvals:

Project manager signature

sponsor or originator signature

Project manager name

sponsor or originator name

Date

Date

Page 4 of 4

Initiating Forms   9  

1.2 Assumption Log
Assumptions are factors in the planning process that are considered to be true, real, or certain, without
proof or demonstration. Constraints are also documented in this log. Constraints are limiting factors that
affect the execution of the project. Typical constraints include a predetermined budget or fixed milestones
for deliverables. Information in the assumption log includes:
• Identifier
• Category
• Assumption or constraint
• Responsible party
• Due date
• Actions
• Status
• Comments
Assumptions can come from any document in the project. They can also be determined by the project team. Constraints may be documented in the project charter and are determined by the customer,
sponsor, or regulatory agencies.
The assumption log provides information to:
• Requirements documentation
• Project scope statement
• Network diagram
• Duration estimates
• Project schedule
• Quality management plan
• Resource estimates
• Risk register
• Stakeholder engagement plan
The assumption log is an output from the process 4.1 Develop Project Charter in the PMBOK®
Guide – Sixth Edition. This log is a dynamic document that is updated throughout the project.
Assumptions are progressively elaborated throughout the project and are eventually validated and no
longer assumptions.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help you tailor the assumption log to meet your needs:
• Combine the assumption log with the issue register and the decision log, to create an AID Log
(A = assumption, I = issue, D = decision). You can create them in a spreadsheet with each sheet
dedicated to either assumptions, issues, or decisions.
• If you have a very large project you may want to keep the constraints in a separate log from the
assumptions.

10   Initiating Forms
Alignment
The assumption log should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project charter
• Issue log
• Risk register

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 1.2 to assist you in developing the assumption log.
Table 1.2 Elements of an Assumption Log
Document Element

Description

ID

Identifier

Category

The category of the assumption or constraint

Assumption/constraint

A description of the assumption or constraint

Responsible party

The person who is tasked with following up on the assumption to validate if it is true
or not

Due date

The date by which the assumption needs to be validated

Actions

Actions that need to be taken to validate assumptions

Status

The status of the assumptions, such as active, transferred, or closed

Comments

Any additional information regarding the assumption or constraint

ID

category

Project title:

assumption/constraint

Page 1 of 1

responsible Party

Date Prepared:

Due Date

ASSUMPTION LOG

actions

status

comments

12   Initiating Forms

1.3 Stakeholder Register
The stakeholder register is used to identify those people and organizations impacted by the project and to
document relevant information about each stakeholder. Relevant information can include:
• Name
• Position in the organization
• Role in the project
• Contact information
• List of stakeholder’s major requirements
• List of stakeholder’s expectations
• Classification of each stakeholder
Initially you will not have enough information to complete the stakeholder register. As the project gets
underway you will gain additional information and understanding about each stakeholder’s requirements,
expectations, and classification and the stakeholder register will become more robust.
The stakeholder register receives information from:
• Project charter
• Procurement documents
It is related to:
• Stakeholder analysis matrix
It provides information to:
• Requirements documentation
• Quality management plan
• Communications management plan
• Risk management plan
• Risk register
• Stakeholder engagement plan
The stakeholder register is an output from the process 13.1 Identify Stakeholders in the PMBOK®
Guide – Sixth Edition. The stakeholder register is a dynamic project document. The stakeholders, their
level of influence, requirements, and classification are likely to change throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help you tailor the stakeholder register to meet your needs:
• Combine the position in the organization with the role on the project, especially if it is a smaller project
and everyone knows everyone else’s position.
• Combine the stakeholder analysis matrix information with the stakeholder register.
• Eliminate position, role, and contact information for small internal projects.

Initiating Forms   13  
Alignment
The stakeholder register should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project charter
• Stakeholder analysis matrix
• Stakeholder engagement plan

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 1.3 to assist you in developing the stakeholder register.

Table 1.3 Elements of a Stakeholder Register
Document Element

Description

Name

Stakeholder’s name. If you don’t have a name you can substitute a position or organization
until you have more information

Position/Role

The position and/or role the stakeholder holds in the organization. Examples of positions
include programmer, human resources analyst, or quality assurance specialist. Roles indicate the function the stakeholder performs on the project team, such as testing lead, Scrum
Master, or scheduler

Contact information

How to communicate with the stakeholder, such as their phone number, email address, or
physical address

Requirements

High-level needs for the project and/or product

Expectations

Main expectations of the project and/or product

Classification

Some projects may categorize stakeholders as friend, foe, or neutral; others may classify
them as high, medium, or low impact

name

Project title:

Position/role

Page 1 of 1

contact Information

Date Prepared:
requirements

STAKEHOLDER REGISTER

expectations

classification

Initiating Forms   15  

1.4 Stakeholder Analysis
Stakeholder analysis is used to classify stakeholders. It can be used to help fill in the stakeholder register.
Analyzing stakeholders can also help in planning stakeholder engagement for groups of stakeholders.
The following example is used to assess the relative power (high or low), the relative interest (high or
low), and the attitude (friend or foe). There are many other ways to categorize stakeholders. Some examples include:
• Influence/impact
• Power/urgency/legitimacy
Stakeholder analysis receives information from:
• Project charter
• Procurement documents
Stakeholder analysis is a tool used in 13.1 Identify Stakeholders in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help you tailor the stakeholder analysis to meet your needs:
• For projects with relatively homogenous stakeholders you can use a 2 × 2 grid that only considers
two variables, such as interest and influence.
• For larger projects consider using a 3 × 3 stakeholder cube. Tailor the categories to reflect the importance of various stakeholder variables.

Alignment
The stakeholder analysis should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Stakeholder register
• Stakeholder engagement plan

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 1.4 to assist you in developing a stakeholder analysis.
Table 1.4 Stakeholder Analysis
Document Element

Description

Name or role

The stakeholder name, organization, or group

Interest

The level of concern the stakeholder has for the project

Influence

The degree to which the stakeholder can drive or influence outcomes for the project

Attitude

The degree to which the stakeholder supports the project

name or role

Project title:

Interest

Page 1 of 1

Date Prepared:

Influence

STAKEHOLDER ANALYSIS

attitude

Planning Forms

2

2.0 Planning ProceSS grouP
The purpose of the Planning Process Group is to elaborate the information from the project charter to create a comprehensive set of plans that will enable the project team to deliver the project objectives. There
are 24 processes in the Planning Process Group.
• Develop project management plan
• Plan scope management
• Collect requirements
• Define scope
• Create work breakdown structure (WBS)
• Plan schedule management
• Define activities
• Sequence activities
• Estimate activity durations
• Develop schedule
• Plan cost management
• Estimate costs
• Determine budget
• Plan quality management
• Plan resource management
• Estimate activity resources
• Plan communications management
• Plan risk management
• Identify risks
• Perform qualitative analysis
• Perform quantitative analysis
• Plan risk responses
• Plan procurement management
• Plan stakeholder management
The intent of the Planning Process Group is to at least:
• Elaborate and clarify the project scope
• Develop a realistic schedule

18   Planning Forms
• Develop a realistic budget
• Identify project and product quality processes
• Identify and plan for the needed project resources
• Determine and plan for the communication needs
• Establish risk management practices
• Identify the procurement needs of the project
• Determine how to effectively engage stakeholders
• Combine all the planning information into a project management plan and a set of project documents
that are cohesive and integrated
Planning is not a one-time event. It occurs throughout the project. Initial plans will become more detailed
as additional information about the project becomes available. Additionally, as changes are approved for the
project or product, many of the planning processes will need to be revisited and the documents revised and
updated.
Many of the forms in this section provide information needed for other forms. The form description indicates from where information is received and to where it goes.
The forms used to document planning information include:
• Project management plan
• Change management plan
• Project roadmap
• Scope management plan
• Requirements management plan
• Requirements documentation
• Requirements traceability matrix
• Project scope statement
• Assumption log
• Work breakdown structure (WBS)
• Work breakdown structure dictionary
• Schedule management plan
• Activity list
• Activity attributes
• Milestone list
• Network diagram
• Duration estimates
• Duration estimating worksheet
• Project schedule
• Cost management plan
• Cost estimates
• Cost estimating worksheet
• Bottom-up cost estimating worksheet
• Cost baseline
• Quality management plan
• Quality metrics
• Responsibility assignment matrix
• Roles and responsibilities
• Resource management plan
• Team charter
• Resource requirements
• Resource breakdown structure
• Communications management plan

Planning Forms   19  
• Risk management plan
• Risk register
• Risk report
• Probability and impact assessment
• Probability and impact matrix
• Risk data sheet
• Procurement management plan
• Procurement strategy
• Source selection criteria
• Procurement strategy
• Stakeholder engagement plan
Some forms in this section are not explicitly described in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition, but they
are useful in planning and managing a project. Use the forms here as a starting point for your project. You
should tailor the forms to meet the needs of your project by editing, combining, or revising them.

20   Planning Forms

2.1 Project Management Plan
The project management plan describes how the team will execute, monitor, control, and close the project. While it has some unique information, it is primarily comprised of all the subsidiary management plans
and the baselines. The project management plan combines all this information into a cohesive and integrated approach to managing the project. Typical information includes:
• Selected project life cycle
• Development approach for key deliverables
• Variance thresholds
• Baseline management
• Timing and types of reviews
The project management plan contains plans for managing all the Knowledge Areas as well as specific
aspects of the project that require special focus. These take the form of subsidiary management plans and
can include:
• Change management plan
• Scope management plan
• Schedule management plan
• Requirements management plan
• Cost management plan
• Quality management plan
• Resource management plan
• Communications management plan
• Risk management plan
• Procurement management plan
• Stakeholder engagement plan
The project management plan also contains baselines. Common baselines include:
• Scope baseline
• Schedule baseline
• Cost baseline
• Performance measurement baseline (an integrated baseline that includes scope, schedule, and cost)
In addition, any other relevant, project-specific information that will be used to manage the project is
recorded in the project management plan.
The project management plan can receive information from all the subsidiary management plans and
baselines. Because it is the foundational document for managing the project it also provides information to
all subsidiary plans. In addition, the project management plan provides information to all other integration
processes.
The project management plan is an output from the process 4.2 Develop Project Management Plan
in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. This document is developed as the initial project planning is conducted, and then it is not usually changed unless there is a significant change in the charter, environment,
or scope of the project.

Planning Forms   21  
Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the project management plan to meet your needs:
• For large and complex projects, each subsidiary management plan will likely be a separate standalone plan. In this case you may present your project management plan as a shell with just information on the life cycle, development approach, and key reviews, and then provide a link or reference to
the more detailed subsidiary management plans.
• For smaller projects, a project roadmap that summarizes the project phases, major deliverables,
milestones, and key reviews may be sufficient.
• You will likely have additional subsidiary management plans that are relevant to the nature of your
project, such as a technology management plan, a logistics management plan, a safety management
plan, and so forth.

Alignment
The project management plan should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• All subsidiary management plans
• Project roadmap
• Milestone list

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.1 to assist you in developing a project management plan.
Table 2.1 Elements of a Project Management Plan
Document Element

Description

Project life cycle

Describe the life cycle that will be used to accomplish the project. This may
include the following:
• Name of each phase
• Key activities for the phase
• Key deliverables for the phase
• Entry criteria for the phase
• Exit criteria for the phase
• Key reviews for the phase

Development approaches

Document the specific approach you will take to create key deliverables.
Common approaches include predictive approaches, where the scope is
known and stable; and adaptive approaches, where the scope is evolving and
subject to change. It may also include iterative or incremental development
approaches.

Subsidiary management plans

List the subsidiary management plans that are part of the project management
plan. This can be in the form of a “table of contents,” links to electronic copies
of the subsidiary plans, or a list of the other plans that should be considered
part of the project management plan, but are separate documents.
(continued)

22   Planning Forms
Table 2.1 Elements of a Project Management Plan (continued)
Document Element

Description

Scope variance threshold

Define acceptable scope variances, variances that indicate a warning, and variances that are unacceptable. Scope variance can be indicated by the features
and functions that are present in the end product, or the performance metrics
that are desired.

Scope baseline management

Describe how the scope baseline will be managed, including responses to
acceptable, warning, and unacceptable variances. Define circumstances that
would trigger preventive or corrective action and when the change control
process would be enacted. Define the difference between a scope revision
and a scope change. Generally, a revision does not require the same degree of
approval that a change does. For example, changing the color of something is
a revision; changing a function is a change.

Schedule variance threshold

Define acceptable schedule variances, variances that indicate a warning, and
variances that are unacceptable. Schedule variances may indicate the percent
of variance from the baseline or they may include the amount of float used or
whether any schedule reserve has been used.

Schedule baseline management

Describe how the schedule baseline will be managed, including responses to
acceptable, warning, and unacceptable variances. Define circumstances that
would trigger preventive or corrective action and when the change control process would be enacted.

Cost variance threshold

Define acceptable cost variances, variances that indicate a warning, and variances that are unacceptable. Cost variances may indicate the percent of variance from the baseline, such as 0–5 percent, 5–10 percent, and greater than
10 percent.

Cost baseline management

Describe how the cost baseline will be managed, including responses to
acceptable, warning, and unacceptable variances. Define circumstances that
would trigger preventive or corrective action and when the change control process would be enacted.

Baselines

Attach all project baselines.

PROJECT MANAGEMENT PLAN
Project title:

Date Prepared:

Project life cycle:
Phase

Phase

key activities

reviews

key Deliverables

entry criteria

Development approaches:
Deliverable

Development approach

Subsidiary Management Plans:
name

comment

Scope
Time
Cost
Quality
Resource
Communications
Risk
Procurement
Stakeholder
Other Plans
Page 1 of 2

exit criteria

PROJECT MANAGEMENT PLAN
variance thresholds:
Scope variance threshold

Scope baseline Management

Schedule variance threshold

Schedule baseline Management

cost variance threshold

cost baseline Management

baselines:
Attach all project baselines.
Page 2 of 2

Planning Forms   25  

2.2 Change Management Plan
The change management plan is a component of the project management plan. It describes how change
will be managed on the project. Typical information includes:
• Structure and membership of a change control board
• Definitions of change
• Change control board
○○ Roles
○○ Responsibilities
○○ Authority
• Change management process
○○ Change request submittal
○○ Change request tracking
○○ Change request review
○○ Change request disposition
The change management plan is related to:
• Change log
• Change request form
It provides information to:
• Project management plan
The change management plan is a part of the project management plan and as such it is an output
from the process 4.2 Develop Project Management Plan in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. This document is developed once and is not usually changed.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the change management plan to meet your needs:
• If you have a few product components or project documents that require configuration management,
you may be able to combine change management and configuration management into one plan.
• The rigor and structure of your change management plan should reflect the product development
approach. For predictive approaches, a rigorous change management approach is appropriate. For
adaptive approaches, the change management plan should allow for evolving scope.

Alignment
The change management plan should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project roadmap or development approach
• Scope management plan
• Requirements management plan

26   Planning Forms
• Schedule management plan
• Cost management plan
• Quality management plan
• Configuration management plan

Description
You can use the descriptions in Table 2.2 to assist you in developing a change management plan.
TABLE 2.2 Elements of a Change Management Plan
Document Element

Description

Change management approach

Describe the degree of change control and how change control will integrate with
other aspects of project management.

Definitions of change

Schedule Change: Define a schedule change versus a schedule revision. Indicate
when a schedule variance needs to go through the change control process to be
re-baselined.
Budget Change: Define a budget change versus a budget update. Indicate
when a budget variance needs to go through the change control process to be
re-baselined.
Scope Change: Define a scope change versus progressive elaboration. Indicate
when a scope variance needs to go through the change control process to be
re-baselined.
Project Document Change: Define when updates to project management documents or other project documents need to go through the change control process
to be re-baselined.

Change control board

Name

Individual’s name

Role

Position on the change control board

Responsibility

Responsibilities and activities required of the role

Authority

Authority level for approving or rejecting changes

Change request submittal

Describe the process used to submit change
requests, including who receives requests and any
special forms, policies, or procedures that need to
be used.

Change request tracking

Describe the process for tracking change requests
from submittal to final disposition.

Change request review

Describe the process used to review change
requests, including analysis of impact on project
objectives such as schedule, scope, cost, etc.

Change request outcome

Describe the possible outcomes, such as accept,
defer, or reject.

Change control process

CHANGE MANAGEMENT PLAN
Date Prepared:

Project title:
change Management approach:

Definitions of change:
Schedule change:

Budget change:

Scope change:

Project document changes:

change control board:
name

role

responsibility

change control Process:
Change request submittal
Change request tracking
Change request review
Change request disposition
Attach relevant forms used in the change control process.
Page 1 of 1

authority

28   Planning Forms

2.3 Project Roadmap
The project roadmap is a high-level visual summary of the life cycle phases, key deliverables, management
reviews and milestones. Typical information includes:
• Project life cycle phases
• Major deliverables or events in each phase
• Significant milestones
• Timing and types of reviews
The project roadmap can receive information from the project charter and the project management
plan. In particular, the key deliverables, project life cycle, management reviews, and scope and schedule
baselines.
It provides information to
• Project schedule
• Risk register
• Milestone list
The project roadmap is not listed as an output in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. If it is developed
it would be in conjunction with the project management plan. It is developed once, and then only changed
if dates of the key events, milestones, or deliverables change.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the project roadmap to meet your needs:
• For large and complex projects this will likely be a separate stand-alone document.
• For smaller projects the project roadmap may serve as the project management plan.

Alignment
The project roadmap should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project management plan
• Milestone list

Description
You can use the element descriptions in the following table to assist you in developing a project management plan.
Document Element

Description

Project life cycle phases

The name of each life cycle phase

Major deliverables or events

Key deliverables, phase gates, key approvals, external events, or other significant
events in the project

Significant milestones

Milestones in the project

Timing and types of reviews

Management, customer, compliance, or other significant reviews

Start
Jun 2 '14

Sep 2

Project Start Up
Jun 2 - Sep 2

3rd Quarter
Nov 12

Dec 27

Mar 23

Front End baselined

Jun 27a

1st Quarter

QC and Edit

Oct 28

Pre-Exposure Draft Vote

Guide QC and Edit
Nov 1 – Mar 1

Page 1 of 1

SME/MAG Review

3rd Quarter

Standard
Finalized

Adjudicate and Appeals
Feb 14 – June 13

Knowledge Areasa
Dec 27 - Oct 28a

Exposure
Jan 14 –
Feb 13

SME/MAG Review

Front End Chapters 1-4a
Sep 2 - Mar 23a

Project Standard
Sep 2 '14 - Dec 27 '14

Development

1st Quarter

SME/MAG Review

Project Origination Review

Timeline

Origination

Life Cycle Phases

Guide Exposure Draft
Mar 1 – Aug 1

Mar 14

Exposure Draft
posted

Aug 1

QC and Finalize
Aug 1 – Oct 1

Dec 31 '16

Project Target End Date

QC Review

Contingency
Oct 1 - Dec
31

Dec 11

Consensus Body
Approval

Sept 7

Finalize

3rd Quarter

Exposure
Complete

Exposure

Waterfall phases.
Iterative development of content throughout Development, QC Edit, Exposure, and Finalization Phases.

Approach

PROJECT ROADMAP

30   Planning Forms

2.4 Scope Management Plan
The scope management plan is part of the project management plan. It specifies how the project scope
will be defined, developed, monitored, controlled, and validated. Planning how to manage scope should
include at least processes for:
• Developing a detailed scope statement
• Decomposing the project into discrete deliverables using a WBS
• Determining what constitutes a scope change versus a revision and how scope changes will be
managed through the formal change control process
• Maintaining the WBS and the scope baseline
• How deliverables will be accepted
In addition, the scope management plan may provide direction on the elements that should be contained in a WBS Dictionary and how the scope and requirements management plans interact.
The scope management plan can receive information from:
• Project charter
• Project management plan
It provides information to:
• Requirements documentation
• Scope statement
• WBS
• WBS dictionary
The scope management plan is an output from the process 5.1 Plan Scope Management in the
PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. It is developed once and does not usually change.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the scope management plan to meet your needs:
• For smaller projects you can combine the scope management plan with the requirements management plan.
• For larger projects consider a test and evaluation plan that defines how deliverables will be validated
and accepted by the customer.
• If your project involves business analysis you may want to incorporate information on how business
analysis activities and project management activities will interact.
• If you are using an agile or adaptive development approach you may want to incorporate information
on the release and iteration plans.

Alignment
The scope management plan should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Development approach
• Life cycle description
• Change management plan
• Requirements management plan
• Release and iteration plan

Planning Forms   31  
Description
You can use the descriptions in Table 2.3 to assist you in developing a scope management plan.
Table 2.3 Elements of the Scope Management Plan
Document Element

Description

WBS

Describe the WBS and whether it will be arranged using phases, geography, major
deliverables, or some other way. The guidelines for establishing control accounts
and work packages can also be documented in this section.

WBS Dictionary

Identify the information that will be documented in the WBS Dictionary and the level
of detail required.

Scope baseline maintenance

Identify the types of scope changes that will need to go through the formal change
control process and how the scope baseline will be maintained.

Deliverable acceptance

For each deliverable, identify how the deliverable will be validated for customer
acceptance, including any tests or documentation needed for sign-off.

Scope and requirements
integration

Describe how project and product requirements will be addressed in the scope
statement and WBS. Identify the integration points and how requirements and
scope validation will occur.

Project management and busi- Describe how business analysis and project management will integrate as scope is
ness analysis integration
being defined, developed, tested, validated, and turned over to operations.

SCOPE MANAGEMENT PLAN
Project title:

Date:

Work breakdown (WbS) Structure

WbS Dictionary

Scope baseline Maintenance

Deliverable acceptance

Scope and requirements integration

Page 1 of 1

Planning Forms   33  

2.5 Requirements Management Plan
The requirements management plan is part of the project management plan. It specifies how requirements activities will be conducted throughout the project. Managing requirements activities includes
at least:
• Planning activities such as:
○○ Collecting/eliciting
○○ Analyzing
○○ Categorizing
○○ Prioritizing
○○ Documenting
○○ Determining metrics
○○ Defining the traceability structure
• Managing activities such as:
○○ Tracking
○○ Reporting
○○ Tracing
○○ Validating
○○ Performing configuration management
The requirements management plan can receive information from:
• Project charter
• Development approach
• Quality management plan
It is related to:
• Scope management plan
It provides information to:
• Requirements documentation
• Requirements traceability matrix
• Quality management plan
• Risk register
The requirements management plan is an output from the process 5.1 Plan Scope Management in the
PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. It is developed once and does not usually change.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the management plan to meet your needs:
• For smaller projects you can combine the requirements management plan with the scope management plan.
• If your project involves business analysis, you may want to incorporate information on how business
analysis requirements activities and project management requirements activities will interact.
• You can document the test and evaluation strategy in this plan. For larger projects you may want to
have a separate testing plan.
• If you are using an agile or adaptive development approach you may want to incorporate information
on how the backlog will be used to manage and track requirements.

34   Planning Forms
Alignment
The requirements management plan should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Development approach
• Change management plan
• Scope management plan
• Release and iteration plan
• Requirements backlog

Description
You can use the descriptions in Table 2.4 to assist you in developing a requirements management plan.
Table 2.4 Elements of the Requirements Management Plan
Document Element

Description

Requirements collection

Describe how requirements will be collected or elicited. Consider techniques
such as brainstorming, interviewing, observation, etc.

Requirements analysis

Describe how requirements will be analyzed for prioritization, categorization,
and impact to the product or project approach.

Requirements categories

Identify categories for requirements such as business, stakeholder, quality, etc.

Requirements documentation

Define how requirements will be documented. The format of a requirements
document may range from a simple spreadsheet to more elaborate forms containing detailed descriptions and attachments.

Requirements prioritization

Identify the prioritization approach for requirements. Certain requirements will
be non-negotiable, such as those that are regulatory or those that are needed
to comply with the organization’s policies or infrastructure. Other requirements
may be nice to have, but not necessary for functionality.

Requirements metrics

Document the metrics that requirements will be measured against. For example,
if the requirement is that the product must be able to support 150 lb, the metric may be that it is designed to support 120 percent (180 lb) and that any
design or engineering decisions that cause the product to go below the 120
percent need approval by the customer.

Requirements traceability

Identify the information that will be used to link requirements from their origin to
the deliverables that satisfy them.

Requirements tracking

Describe how often and what techniques will be used to track progress on
requirements.

Requirements reporting

Describe how reporting on requirements will be conducted and the frequency of
such reporting.

Requirements validation

Identify the various methods that will be used to validate requirements such as
inspection, audits, demonstration, testing, etc.

Requirements configuration
management

Describe the configuration management system that will be used to control
requirements, documentation, the change management process, and the
authorization levels needed to approve changes.

REQUIREMENTS MANAGEMENT PLAN
Project title:

Date:

collection:

analysis:

categories:

Documentation:

Prioritization:

Page 1 of 2

REQUIREMENTS MANAGEMENT PLAN
Metrics:

traceability Structure:

tracking:

reporting:

validation:

configuration Management:

Page 2 of 2

Planning Forms   37  

2.6 Requirements Documentation
Project success is directly influenced by the discovery and decomposition of stakeholders’ needs into
requirements and by the care taken in determining, documenting, and managing the requirements of the
product, service, or result of the project.
These requirements need to be documented in enough detail to be included in the scope baseline and
be measured and validated. Requirements documentation assists the project manager in making tradeoff
decisions among requirements and in managing stakeholder expectations. Requirements will be progressively elaborated as more information about the project becomes available.
When documenting requirements, it is useful to group them by category. Some common categories
include:
• Business requirements
• Stakeholder requirements
• Solution requirements
• Transition and readiness requirements
• Project requirements
• Quality requirements
Requirements documentation should include at least:
• Identifier
• Requirement
• Stakeholder
• Category
• Priority
• Acceptance criteria
• Test or verification method
• Release or phase
Requirements documentation can receive information from:
• Project charter
• Assumption log
• Stakeholder register
• Scope management plan
• Requirements management plan
• Stakeholder management plan
• Lessons learned register
It provides information to:
• Stakeholder register
• Scope baseline
• Quality management plan
• Resource management plan
• Communications management plan
• Risk register
• Procurement management plan
• Project close out report

38   Planning Forms
Requirements documentation is an output from the process 5.2 Collect Requirements in the PMBOK®
Guide – Sixth Edition. This process is done once for projects that have a well-defined scope that is not
likely to change. For projects that are adaptive, the requirements documentation can evolve and change
throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the requirements documentation to meet your needs:
• If you are using an agile or adaptive development approach you may want to incorporate information
on the release or iteration for each requirement.
• For a project with a lot of requirements you may want to indicate the relationships between
requirements.
• You can add information about assumptions or constraints associated with requirements.
• For small and quick adaptive or agile projects, the requirements documentation and backlog can be
combined.

Alignment
The requirements documentation should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Requirements management plan
• Benefits management plan
• Quality management plan
• Requirements traceability matrix
• Release plan

Description
You can use the descriptions in Table 2.5 to assist you in developing requirements documentation.

Table 2.5 Elements of Requirements Documentation
Document Element

Description

ID

A unique identifier for the requirement

Requirement

The condition or capability that must be met by the project or be present in the product,
service, or result to satisfy a need or expectation of a stakeholder

Stakeholder

Stakeholder’s name. If you don’t have a name you can substitute a position or organization until you have more information

Category

The category of the requirement

Priority

The priority group, for example Level 1, Level 2, etc., or must have, should have, or nice
to have

Acceptance criteria

The criteria that must be met for the stakeholder to approve that the requirement has
been fulfilled

Test or verification method The means that will be used to verify that the requirement has been met. This can
include inspection, test, demonstration, or analysis
Phase or release

The phase or release in which the requirement will be met

iD

Project title:

requirement

Stakeholder

Priority

Page 1 of 1

category

Date Prepared:
acceptance
criteria

test or
verification

REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENTATION

Phase or
release

40   Planning Forms

2.7 Requirements Traceability Matrix
A requirements traceability matrix is used to track the various attributes of requirements throughout the
project life cycle. It uses information from the requirements documentation and traces how those requirements are addressed through other aspects of the project. The following form shows how requirements
would be traced to project objectives, WBS deliverables, the metrics they will be measured to, and how
they will be validated.
Another way to use the matrix is to trace the relationship between categories of requirements. For
example:
• Business objectives and technical requirements
• Functional requirements and technical requirements
• Requirements and verification method
• Technical requirements and WBS deliverables
An inter-requirements traceability matrix can be used to record this information. A sample form is
included after the requirements traceability matrix.
The requirements traceability matrix can receive information from:
• Project charter
• Assumption log
• Stakeholder register
• Scope management plan
• Requirements management plan
• Stakeholder engagement plan
• Lessons learned register
It provides information to:
• Quality management plan
• Procurement statement of work
• Product acceptance
• Change requests
The requirements traceability matrix is an output from the process 5.2 Collect Requirements in the
PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the requirements traceability matrix to meet your needs:
• For complex projects you may need to invest in requirements management software to help manage
and track requirements. Using a paper form is usually only helpful for small projects or when tracking
requirements at a high level.
• For projects with one or more vendors you may want to add a field indicating which organization is
accountable for meeting each requirement.
• Consider an outline format with the business requirement at a parent level and technical requirement
and specifications subordinate to the business requirement.

Planning Forms   41  
Alignment
The requirements traceability matrix should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Development approach
• Requirements management plan
• Requirements documentation
• Release and iteration plan

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Tables 2.6 and 2.7 to assist you in developing a requirements
traceability matrix and an inter-requirements traceability matrix. The matrix shown uses an example of business and technical requirements.

42   Planning Forms
Table 2.6 Requirements Traceability Matrix
Document Element

Description

ID

Enter a unique requirement identifier.

Requirement

Document the condition or capability that must be met by the project or be present in the
product, service, or result to satisfy a need or expectation of a stakeholder.

Source

The stakeholder that identified the requirement.

Category

Categorize the requirement. Categories can include functional, nonfunctional, maintainability, security, etc.

Priority

Prioritize the requirement category, for example Level 1, Level 2, etc., or must have, should
have, or nice to have.

Business objective

List the business objective as identified in the charter or business case that is met by fulfilling the requirement.

Deliverable

Identify the deliverable that is associated with the requirement.

Verification

Describe the metric that is used to measure the satisfaction of the requirement.

Validation

Describe the technique that will be used to validate that the requirement meets the stakeholder needs.

Table 2.7 Inter-Requirements Traceability Matrix
Document Element

Description

ID

Enter a unique business requirement identifier.

Business
requirement

Document the condition or capability that must be met by the project or be present in the
product, service, or result to satisfy the business needs.

Priority

Prioritize the business requirement category, for example Level 1, Level 2, etc., or must
have, should have, or nice to have.

Source

Document the stakeholder who identified the business requirement.

ID

Enter a unique technical requirement identifier.

Technical
requirement

Document the technical performance that must be met by the deliverable to satisfy a need
or expectation of a stakeholder.

Priority

Prioritize the technical requirement category, for example Level 1, Level 2, etc., or must
have, should have, or nice to have.

Source

Document the stakeholder who identified the technical requirement.

iD

Project title:

requirement

Source

requirement information
Priority

Page 1 of 2

category

Date Prepared:

business
objective
Deliverable

verification

relationship traceability

REQUIREMENTS TRACEABILITY MATRIX

validation

iD

business requirement

Project title:
Priority

iD

Page 2 of 2

Source

Date Prepared:
technical requirement

Priority

INTER-REQUIREMENTS TRACEABILITY MATRIX
Source

Planning Forms   45  

2.8 Project Scope Statement
The project scope statement assists in defining and developing the project and product scope. The project
scope statement should contain at least this information:
• Project scope description
• Project deliverables
• Product acceptance criteria
• Project exclusions
The project scope statement can receive information from:
• Project charter
• Assumption log
• Scope management plan
• Requirements documentation
• Risk register
It provides information to:
• Work breakdown structure
• Scope baseline
The project scope statement is an output from the process 5.3 Define Scope in the PMBOK® Guide –
Sixth Edition. It is developed once and is not usually updated unless there is a significant change in scope.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the project scope statement to meet your needs:
• For smaller projects you can combine the project scope statement with the project charter.
• For agile projects you can combine the information with the release and iteration plan.

Alignment
The project scope statement should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project charter
• Work breakdown structure
• Requirements documentation

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.8 to assist you in developing a project scope statement.

46   Planning Forms
Table 2.8 Elements of a Project Scope Statement
Document Element

Description

Project scope description

Project scope is progressively elaborated from the project description in the project
charter and the requirements in the requirements documentation.

Project deliverables

Project deliverables are progressively elaborated from the project description key deliverables in the project charter.

Product acceptance criteria

Acceptance criteria is progressively elaborated from the information in the project
charter. Acceptance criteria can be developed for each component of the project.

Project exclusions

Project exclusions clearly define what is out of scope for the product and project.

PROJECT SCOPE STATEMENT
Project title:

Date Prepared:

Project Scope Description:

Project Deliverables:

Product acceptance criteria:

Project exclusions:

Page 1 of 2

PROJECT SCOPE STATEMENT
Project constraints

Project assumptions

Page 2 of 2

Planning Forms   49  

2.9 Work Breakdown Structure
The work breakdown structure (WBS) is used to decompose all the work of the project. It begins at the
project level and is successively broken down into finer levels of detail. The lowest level, a work package,
represents a discrete deliverable that can be decomposed into activities to produce the deliverable.
The WBS should have a method of identifying the hierarchy, such as a numeric structure. The WBS
can be shown as a hierarchical chart or as an outline. The approved WBS, its corresponding WBS dictionary,
and the project scope statement comprise the scope baseline for the project.
The WBS can receive information from:
• Scope management plan
• Project scope statement
• Requirements documentation
As part of the scope baseline it provides information to:
• Activity list
• Network diagram
• Duration estimates
• Project schedule
• Cost estimates
• Project budget
• Quality management plan
• Resource management plan
• Activity resource requirements
• Risk register
• Procurement management plan
• Accepted deliverables
The work breakdown structure is an output from the process 5.4 Create WBS in the PMBOK® Guide –
Sixth Edition. The high levels of the WBS are defined at the start of the project. The lower levels may be
progressively elaborated as the project continues.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the WBS to meet your needs:
• The needs of the project will determine the way that the WBS is organized. The second level determines the organization of the WBS. Some options for organizing and arranging the WBS include:
○○ Geography
○○ Major deliverables
○○ Life cycle phases
○○ Subprojects
• For smaller projects you may use a WBS that is depicted like an organizational chart with deliverables in boxes and subordinate deliverables beneath them.
• For larger projects you will need to arrange the WBS in an outline format and provide a numbering
structure.

50   Planning Forms
• At the beginning of the project you may only have two or three levels of the WBS defined. Through
the process of progressive elaboration you will continue to decompose the work into more refined
deliverables.
• If your organization has accounting codes you may need to align each deliverable to a specific
accounting code to track expenditures.

Alignment
The WBS should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project charter
• Requirements documentation
• Project scope statement
• WBS dictionary
• Activity list

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.9 to assist you in developing a work breakdown structure.
Table 2.9 Elements of a Work Breakdown Structure
Document Element

Description

Control account

The point where scope, schedule, and cost are integrated and used to measure project
performance

Work package

The lowest-level deliverable defined in the WBS for estimating and measuring resources, cost,
and duration. Each work package rolls up to one and only one control account for reporting
purposes.

WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
Project title:

1.

Date Prepared:

Project
1.1. Major Deliverable
1.1.1.

1.1.2.

Control Account
1.1.1.1.

Work Package

1.1.1.2.

Work Package

1.1.1.3.

Work Package

Work Package

1.2. Control Account
1.2.1.

Work Package

1.2.2.

Work Package

1.3. Major Deliverable
1.3.1.

1.3.2.

Control Account
1.3.1.1.

Work Package

1.3.1.2.

Work Package

1.3.1.3.

Work Package

Control Account
1.3.2.1.

Work Package

1.3.2.2.

Work Package

Page 1 of 1

52   Planning Forms

2.10 WBS Dictionary
The WBS dictionary supports the work breakdown structure (WBS) by providing detail about the control
accounts and work packages it contains. The dictionary can provide detailed information about each work
package or summary information at the control account level. The approved WBS, its corresponding WBS
dictionary, and the project scope statement comprise the scope baseline for the project. Information in the
WBS dictionary can include:
• Code of account identifier
• Description of work
• Assumptions and constraints
• Responsible organization or person
• Schedule milestones
• Associated schedule activities
• Resources required
• Cost estimates
• Quality requirements
• Acceptance criteria
• Technical information or references
• Agreement (contract) information
The WBS dictionary is progressively elaborated as the planning processes progress. Once the WBS
is developed, the statement of work for a particular work package may be defined, but the necessary
activities, cost estimates, and resource requirements may not be known. Thus, the inputs for the WBS
­dictionary are more detailed than for the WBS.
Use the information from your project to tailor the form to best meet your needs.
The WBS dictionary can receive information from:
• Requirements documentation
• Project scope statement
• Assumption log
• Activity list
• Milestone list
• Activity resource requirements
• Cost estimates
• Quality metrics
• Contracts
As part of the scope baseline, the WBS dictionary provides information to:
• Activity list
• Network diagram
• Duration estimates
• Project schedule
• Cost estimates
• Project budget
• Quality management plan
• Resource management plan
• Activity resource requirements
• Risk register

Planning Forms   53  
• Procurement management plan
• Accepted deliverables
The WBS dictionary is an output from the process 5.4 Create WBS in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth
Edition. It is progressively elaborated throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the WBS dictionary to meet your needs:
• For smaller projects you may not need a WBS dictionary.
• For projects that do use a WBS dictionary you can tailor the information to be as detailed or as high
level as you need. You may just want to list a description of work, the cost estimate, key delivery
dates, and assigned resources.
• For projects that have deliverables outsourced you can consider the WBS dictionary as a ministatement of work for the outsourced deliverables.
• Projects that use WBS dictionaries can reference other documents and the relevant sections for
technical, quality, or agreement information.

Alignment
The WBS dictionary should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project charter
• Requirements documentation
• Project scope statement
• Wbs
• Activity list

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.10 to assist you in developing a WBS dictionary.

54   Planning Forms
Table 2.10 Elements of a WBS Dictionary
Document Element

Description

Work package name

Enter a brief description of the work package deliverable from the WBS.

Code of account

Enter the code of account from the WBS.

Milestones

List any milestones associated with the work package.

Due dates

List the due dates for milestones associated with the work package.

ID

Enter a unique activity identifier—usually an extension of the WBS code of accounts.

Activity

Describe the activity from the activity list or the schedule.

Team resource

Identify the resources, usually from the resource requirements.

Labor hours

Enter the total effort required.

Labor rate

Enter the labor rate, usually from cost estimates.

Labor total

Multiply the effort hours times the labor rate.

Material units

Enter the amount of material required, usually from the resource requirements.

Material cost

Enter the material cost, usually from cost estimates.

Material total

Multiply the material units times the material cost.

Total cost

Sum the labor, materials, and any other costs associated with the work package.

Quality requirements

Document any quality requirements or metrics associated with the work package.

Acceptance criteria

Describe the acceptance criteria for the deliverable, usually from the scope statement.

Technical information

Describe or reference any technical requirements or documentation needed to complete the work package.

Agreement information

Reference any contracts or other agreements that impact the work package.

agreement information:

technical information:

acceptance criteria:

quality requirements:

3.

2.

activity

resource
hours

total

Page 1 of 1

rate

labor

Due Dates:

Milestones:

iD

assumptions and constraints:

Description of Work:

1.

code of accounts:

units

Date Prepared:

Work Package name:

Project title:

WBS DICTIONARY

cost

Material
total

total cost

56   Planning Forms

2.11 Schedule Management Plan
The schedule management plan is part of the project management plan. It specifies how the project schedule
will be developed, monitored, and controlled. Planning how to manage the schedule can include at least:
• Scheduling methodology
• Scheduling tool
• Level of accuracy for duration estimates
• Units of measure
• Variance thresholds
• Schedule reporting information and format
• Organizational procedure links
• Schedule updates
The schedule management plan can receive information from:
• Project charter
• Project management plan
It provides information to:
• Activity list
• Activity attributes
• Network diagram
• Activity duration estimates
• Project schedule
• Schedule baseline
• Risk register
The schedule management plan is an output from the process 6.1 Plan Schedule Management in the
PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. It is developed once and does not usually change.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the schedule management plan to meet your needs:
• Add information on the level of detail and timing for WBS decomposition based on rolling wave
planning.
• For projects that use agile, add information on the time box periods for releases, waves, and
iterations.
• For projects that use earned value management, include information on rules for establishing percent
complete and the EVM measurement techniques (fixed formula, percent complete, level or effort, etc.).

Alignment
The schedule management plan should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project charter
• Cost management plan

Description
You can use the descriptions in Table 2.11 to assist you in developing a schedule management plan.

Planning Forms   57  
Table 2.11 Elements of the Schedule Management Plan
Document Element

Description

Schedule methodology

Identify the scheduling methodology that will be used for the project, whether it is
critical path, agile, or some other methodology.

Scheduling tool(s)

Identify the scheduling tool(s) that will be used for the project. Tools can include
scheduling software, reporting software, earned value software, etc.

Level of accuracy

Describe the level of accuracy needed for estimates. The level of accuracy may
evolve over time as more information is known (progressive elaboration). If there
are guidelines for rolling wave planning and the level of refinement that will be used
for duration and effort estimates, indicate the levels of accuracy required as time
progresses.

Units of measure

Indicate whether duration estimates will be in days, weeks, months, or some other
unit of measure.

Variance thresholds

Indicate the measures that determine whether an activity, work package, or the project as a whole is on time, requires preventive action, or is late and requires corrective
action.

Schedule reporting and format Document the schedule information required for status and progress reporting. If a
specific reporting format will be used, attach a copy or refer to the specific form or
template.
Organizational procedure links The schedule outline should follow the numbering structure of the WBS. It may also
need to follow the organization’s code of accounts or other accounting and reporting
structures.
Schedule updates

Document the process for updating the schedule, including update frequency, permissions, and version control. Indicate the guidelines for maintaining baseline integrity
and for re-baselining if necessary.

SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT PLAN
Project title:

Date:

Schedule Methodology:

Scheduling tools:

level of accuracy:

units of Measure:

Schedule reporting and Format:

organizational Procedure links:

Schedule updates:

Page 1 of 1

variance thresholds:

Planning Forms   59  

2.12 Activity List
The activity list defines all the activities necessary to complete the project work. It also describes the activities in sufficient detail so that the person performing the work understands the requirements necessary to
complete it correctly. The activity list contains:
• Activity identifier
• Activity name
• Description of work
The activity list can receive information from:
• Schedule management plan
• Scope baseline (particularly the deliverables from the WBS)
It provides information to:
• Network diagram
• Activity duration estimates
• Gantt chart or other schedule presentation
• Activity resource requirements
The activity list is an output from process 6.2 Define Activities in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition.
This process is performed throughout the planning of the project. For adaptive approaches, or projects
that are progressively elaborated, this process is done throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the activity list to meet your needs:
• For some projects you will enter your activities into the schedule tool rather than keep a separate
activity list.
• Not all projects require a column to describe the work.
• For projects that use an adaptive development approach your activity list will evolve as the requirements are added or changed in the product backlog.
• For projects that use an adaptive development approach you may want to add a column that indicates the planned release or iteration for each activity.

Alignment
The activity list should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Milestone list
• Activity attributes
• WBS
• WBS dictionary
• Product backlog
• Iteration release plan

60   Planning Forms
Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.12 to assist you in developing an activity list.
Table 2.12 Elements of an Activity List
Document Element

Description

ID

Unique identifier

Activity name

A brief statement that summarizes the activity. Activities usually start with a verb and
are only a few words.

Description of work

If needed use this field to provide more detail to the activity description, such as a
process or method to accomplish the work.

ACTIVITY LIST
Project title:
iD

Date Prepared:
activity

Description of Work

Page 1 of 1

62   Planning Forms

2.13 Activity Attributes
Activity attributes are the details about the activity. Sometimes the information is entered directly into the
schedule software. Other times the information is collected in a form that can be used later to assist in
building the schedule model. Activity attributes can include:
• Activity identifier or code
• Activity name
• Activity description
• Predecessor and successor activities
• Logical relationships
• Leads and lags
• Imposed dates
• Constraints
• Assumptions
• Resource requirements and skill levels
• Location of performance
• Type of effort
The activity attributes are progressively elaborated as the planning processes progress. Once the activity
list is complete, the description of work for a particular activity may be defined but the necessary attributes,
such as logical relationships and resource requirements, may not be known. Thus, the inputs for the activity
attributes are more detailed than for the activity list and are added to as new information becomes available.
The activity attributes can receive information from:
• Schedule management plan
• Activity list
• Network diagram
• Scope baseline
• Assumption log
• Activity resource requirements
It provides information to:
• Network diagram
• Duration estimates
• Project schedule
• Resource requirements
Activity attributes are an output from process 6.2 Define Activities in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth
Edition. They are developed throughout the planning of the project. For adaptive approaches, or projects
that are progressively elaborated, they are updated throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the activity attributes to meet your needs:
• For some projects you will enter your activities into the schedule tool rather than keep a separate set
of activity attributes.
• Only include the fields you feel necessary to effectively manage your project.
• Constraints and assumptions can be recorded in the assumption log rather than this form.

Planning Forms   63  
• For projects that use an adaptive development approach your activity list will evolve as the requirements are added or changed in the product backlog.
• For projects that use an adaptive development approach you may want to add a field that indicates
the planned release or iteration for each activity.

Alignment
The activity attributes should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Assumption log
• WBS
• WBS dictionary
• Milestone list
• Activity list
• Network diagram
• Duration estimates
• Schedule
• Cost estimates
• Resource requirements

Description
You can use the descriptions in Table 2.13 to assist you in developing the activity attributes.
Table 2.13 Elements of Activity Attributes
Document Element

Description

ID

Unique identifier

Activity name

Document a brief statement that summarizes the activity. The activity name starts
with a verb and is usually only a few words.

Description of work

A description of the activity in enough detail that the person(s) performing the work
understands what is required to complete it.

Predecessor and successor
activities

Identify any predecessor activities that must occur before the activity.
Identify any successor activities that can’t occur until after the activity.

Logical relationships

Describe the nature of the relationship between predecessor or successor activities,
such as start-to-start, finish-to-start, or finish-to-finish.

Leads and lags

Any required delays between activities (lag) or accelerations (lead) that apply to the
logical relationships

Imposed dates

Note any required dates for start, completion, reviews, or accomplishments.

Constraints

Document any limitations associated with the activity, such as finish-no-later-than
dates, approaches to work, resources, etc.

Assumptions

Document any assumptions associated with the activity, such as availability of
resources, skill sets, or other assumptions that impact the activity.

Team resources and
skill levels

Document the number and roles of people needed to complete the work along with
the skill level, such as junior, senior, etc.

Required physical resources

Document the materials, supplies or equipment needed to complete the activity.

Location of performance

If the work is to be completed somewhere other than at the performing site, indicate
the location.

Type of effort

Indicate if the work is a fixed duration, fixed effort, level of effort, apportioned effort,
or other type of work.

relationship

activity:

assumptions:

imposed Dates or other constraints:

location of Performance:

type of effort:

number and type of team resources
required:

Predecessors

Description of Work:

iD:

Project title:

Page 1 of 1

Skill requirements:

lead or lag

relationship

required resources:

Successor

Date Prepared:

ACTIVITY ATTRIBUTES

lead or lag

Planning Forms   65  

2.14 Milestone List
The milestone list defines all the project milestones and describes the nature of each one. It may categorize the milestone as optional or mandatory, internal or external, interim or final, or in any other way that
supports the needs of the project.
The milestone list can receive information from:
• Project charter
• Schedule management plan
• Scope baseline
It provides information to:
• Network diagram
• Duration estimates
• Gantt chart or other schedule presentation
• Change requests
• Close out report
The milestone list is an output from process 6.2 Define Activities in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition.
This is developed once and is not usually changed unless there is a significant scope change.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tip to help tailor the milestone list to meet your needs:
• For some projects you will enter your milestones directly into the schedule tool rather than keep a
separate list of milestones.

Alignment
The milestone list should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project charter
• Activity list
• Network diagram
• Duration estimates
• Schedule

Description
You can use the descriptions in Table 2.14 to assist you in developing the milestone list.
Table 2.14 Elements of a Milestone List
Document Element

Description

Milestone name

Milestone name that uniquely defines the milestone

Milestone description

A description of the milestone in enough detail to understand what is needed to
determine the milestone is complete

Type

A description of the type of milestone, such as
• Internal or external
• Interim or final
• Mandatory or optional

MILESTONE LIST
Project title:
Milestone

Date Prepared:
Milestone Description

Page 1 of 1

type

Planning Forms   67  

2.15 Network Diagram
The network diagram is a visual display of the relationship between schedule elements. The purpose is to
visually depict the types of relationships between components. The components are shown nodes that are
connected by lines with arrows that indicate the nature of the relationship. Relationships can be one of four
types:
1. Finish-to-start (FS). This is the most common type of relationship. The predecessor element must
be complete before the successor element can begin.
2. Start-to-start (SS). In this relationship, the predecessor element must begin before the successor
element begins.
3. Finish-to-finish (FF). In this relationship, the predecessor element must be complete before the successor element can be complete.
4. Start-to-finish (SF). This is the least common type of relationship. The successor element must
begin before the predecessor element can be complete.
In addition to the types of relationships, the network diagram may show modifications to the relationships, such as leads or lags:
• A lag is a directed delay between elements. In a finish-to-start relationship with a three-day lag, the
successor activity would not start until three days after the predecessor was complete. This would
be shown as FS+3d. Lag is not float.
• A lead is an acceleration between elements. In a finish-to-start relationship with a three-day lead,
the successor activity would begin three days before the predecessor was complete. This would be
shown as FS–3d.
• Leads and lags can be applied to any type of relationship.
The network diagram can receive information from:
• Assumption log
• Schedule management plan
• Activity list
• Activity attributes
• Milestone list
• Scope baseline
It provides information to:
• Project schedule
The network diagram is an output from the process 6.3 Sequence Activities in the PMBOK® Guide –
Sixth Edition. This is developed once and is not usually changed unless there is a significant scope
change.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the network diagram to meet your needs:
• At the start of the project you may want to use sticky notes to create a network diagram to get the
idea of the flow of deliverables.

68   Planning Forms
• For some projects you will enter the type of relationship directly into the schedule tool rather than
draw it out. Most scheduling software has the option to see the schedule as a network diagram.
• The network diagram can be produced at the activity level, the deliverable level, or the milestone
level.

Alignment
The network diagram should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project schedule
• Project roadmap
• Milestone list

A
FS-2d

C

B
+2d

SS

E

D

F

Date Prepared:

All other relationships are finish-to-start.

Page 1 of 1

In this network diagram:
There is a two-day lead between the completion of A and beginning of C.
There is a two-day lag between the completion of B and beginning of D.
There is a start-to-start relationship between E and F.
There is a finish-to-finish relationship between G and H.

Start

Project Title:

G

NETWORK DIAGRAM

H

FF

I

End

70   Planning Forms

2.16 Duration Estimates
Duration estimates provide information on the amount of time it will take to complete project work. They
can be determined by developing an estimate for each activity, work package, or control account, using
expert judgment or a quantitative method, such as:
• Parametric estimating
• Analogous estimating
• Three-point estimating
For those activity durations driven by human resources, as opposed to material or equipment, the
duration estimates will generally convert the estimate of effort hours into days or weeks. To convert effort
hours into days, take the total number of hours and divide by 8. To convert to weeks, take the total number of hours and divide by 40.
Duration estimates include at least:
• ID
• Activity description
• Effort hours
Duration estimates can receive information from:
• Assumption log
• Scope baseline
• Schedule management plan
• Activity list
• Activity attributes
• Milestone list
• Resource requirements
• Resource breakdown structure
• Resource calendars
• Project team assignments
• Resource breakdown structure
• Risk register
• Lessons learned register
It provides information to:
• Schedule baseline
• Project schedule
• Risk register
Duration estimates are an output from process 6.4 Estimate Activity Durations in the PMBOK® Guide –
Sixth Edition. They are developed throughout the project as schedule and activity details are refined.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the duration estimates to meet your needs:
• Duration estimates may include contingency reserve to account for risks related to uncertainty in the
duration estimates, ambiguity in the scope, or resource availability.

Planning Forms   71  
• Duration estimates at the level of accuracy that suits your project needs. Rolling wave planning is
often used for duration estimating; as more information is known about the project activities, duration
estimates are refined and updated.
• For projects that are using an agile development approach, set time boxes are used rather than
duration estimates. Additionally, different estimating methods are used.

Alignment
The duration estimates should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Assumption log
• Activity attributes
• Resource requirements

Description
You can use the descriptions in Table 2.15 to assist you in developing the duration estimates.
Table 2.15 Elements of Duration Estimates
Document Element

Description

ID

Unique identifier

Activity description

A description of the work that needs to be done

Effort hours

The amount of labor it will take to accomplish the work; usually shown in hours, but
may be shown in days

Duration estimates

The length of time it will take to accomplish the work; usually shown in days, but may
be shown in weeks or months

DURATION ESTIMATES
Project title:
iD

Date Prepared:
activity Description

Page 1 of 1

effort hours

Duration
estimate

Planning Forms   73  

2.17 Duration Estimating Worksheet
A duration estimating worksheet can help to develop duration estimates when quantitative methods are
used. Quantitative methods include:
• Parametric estimates
• Analogous estimates
• Three-point estimates
Parametric estimates are derived by determining the effort hours needed to complete the work. The
effort hours are then calculated by:
• Dividing the estimated hours by resource quantity (i.e., number of people assigned to the task)
• Dividing the estimated hours by the percent of time the resource(s) are available (i.e., 100 percent of
the time, 75 percent of the time, or 50 percent of the time)
• Multiplying the estimated hours by a performance factor. Experts in a field generally complete work
faster than people with an average skill level or novices. Therefore, a factor to account for the productivity is developed.
Duration estimates can be made even more accurate by considering that most people are productive
on project work only about 75 percent of the time.
Analogous estimates are derived by comparing current work to previous similar work. The size of the
previous work and the duration is compared to the expected size of the current work compared to the previous work. Then the ratio of the size of the current work is multiplied by the previous duration to determine an
estimate. Various factors, such as complexity, can be factored in to make the estimate more accurate. This
type of estimate is generally used to get a high-level estimate when detailed information is not available.
A three-point estimate can be used to account for uncertainty in the duration estimate. Stakeholders
provide estimates for optimistic, most likely, and pessimistic scenarios. These estimates are put into an
equation to determine an expected duration. The needs of the project determine the appropriate equation,
but a common equation is the beta distribution:
Estimated duration =

Optimistic duration + 4 most likely dura
ation + pessimistic duration
6

In formulas, duration is often represented by “t” for “time.”
The duration estimating worksheet can receive information from:
• Assumption log
• Scope baseline
• Activity list
• Activity attributes
• Resource requirements
• Resource calendars
• Project team assignments
• Risk register
• Lessons learned register

74   Planning Forms
It provides information to:
• Duration estimates
Duration estimates are an output from process 6.4 Estimate Activity Duration in the PMBOK® Guide –
Sixth Edition. They are developed throughout the project as schedule and activity details are refined.

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.16 to assist you in estimating durations with the worksheet.

Planning Forms   75  
Table 2.16 Elements of an Activity Duration Estimating Worksheet
Document Element

Description

ID

Unique identifier

Parametric estimates
Effort hours

Enter amount of labor it will take to accomplish the work. Usually shown in hours, but
may also be shown in days.
Example: 150 hours

Resource quantity

Document the number of resources available.
Example: 2 people

Percent available

Enter amount of time the resources are available. Usually shown as the percent of
time available per day or per week.
Example: 75 percent of the time

Performance factor

Estimate a performance factor if appropriate. Generally effort hours are estimated
based on the amount of effort it would take the average resource to complete the
work. This can be modified if you have a highly skilled resource or someone who has
very little experience. The more skilled the resource, the lower the performance factor.
For example, an average resource would have a 1.0 performance factor. A highly
skilled resource could get the work done faster, so you multiply the effort hours times
a performance factor of .8. A less skilled resource will take longer to get the work
done, so you would multiply the effort hours times 1.2.
Example: A skilled worker with a performance factor of .8

Duration estimate

Divide the effort hours by the resource quantity times the percent available times the
performance factor to determine the length of time it will take to accomplish the work.
The equation is:
Effort/ ( quantity × percent available × performance factor ) = duration
Example: 150/ ( 2 × ⋅75 × ⋅8 ) = 125 hours

Analogous estimates
Previous activity

Enter a description of the previous activity.
Example: Build a 160 square foot deck.

Previous duration

Document the duration of the previous activity.
Example: 10 days

Current activity

Describe how the current activity is different.
Example: Build a 200 square foot deck.

Multiplier

Divide the current activity by the previous activity to get a multiplier.
Example: 200/160 = 1.25

Duration estimate

Multiply the duration for the previous activity by the multiplier to calculate the duration
estimate for the current activity.
Example: 10 days x 1.25 = 12.5 days

Three-point estimate (Beta distribution)
Optimistic duration

Determine an optimistic duration estimate. Optimistic estimates assume everything
will go well and there won’t be any delays in material and that all resources are available and will perform as expected.
Example: 20 days
(continued)

76   Planning Forms
Table 2.16 Elements of an Activity Duration Estimating Worksheet (continued)
Document Element

Description

Most likely duration

Determine a most likely duration estimate. Most likely estimates assume that there
will be some delays but nothing out of the ordinary.
Example: 25 days

Pessimistic duration

Determine a pessimistic duration estimate. Pessimistic estimates assume there are
significant risks that will materialize and cause delays.
Example: 36 days

Weighting equation

Weight the three estimates and divide. The most common method of weighting is the
beta distribution:
tE = (tO + 4tM + tP)/6
Example: (20 + 4(25) + 36 )/6

Expected duration

Enter the expected duration based on the beta distribution calculation.
Example: 26 days

DURATION ESTIMATING WORKSHEET
Project title:

Date Prepared:
Parametric estimates

ID

Effort Hours

Resource
Quantity

% Available

Performance
Factor

Duration
Estimate

Multiplier

Duration
Estimate

Weighting
Equation

Expected
Duration
Estimate

analogous estimates
ID

Previous
Activity

Previous
Duration

Current Activity

three-Point estimates

ID

Optimistic
Duration

Most Likely
Duration

Pessimistic
Duration

Page 1 of 1

78   Planning Forms

2.18 Project Schedule
The project schedule combines the information from the activity list, network diagram, resource requirements, duration estimates, and any other relevant information to determine the start and finish dates for
project activities. A common way of showing a schedule is via Gantt chart showing the dependencies
between activities. The sample Gantt chart is for designing, building, and installing kitchen cabinets. It
shows the:
• WBS identifier
• Activity name
• Start dates
• Finish dates
• Resource name (next to the bar)
The project schedule can receive information from:
• Assumption log
• Schedule management plan
• Activity list
• Activity attributes
• Milestone list
• Network diagram
• Duration estimates
• Project team assignments
• Resource calendars
• Project scope statement
• Risk register
• Lessons learned register
It provides information to:
• Cost estimates
• Project budget
• Resource management plan
• Risk register
• Stakeholder engagement plan
The project schedule is an output from the process 6.5 Develop Schedule in the PMBOK® Guide –
Sixth Edition. It is updated and elaborated throughout the projects.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the project schedule to meet your needs:
• For smaller projects you may not require scheduling software; you can use a spreadsheet or some
other means to show the schedule.
• For projects that use scheduling software, the needs of your project will determine the fields you use
and the information you enter and track.
• At the beginning of the project you may only enter the information from the WBS into the schedule.
As you further decompose the work you will enter activities, durations, resources, and other information. The level of detail depends on the needs of the project.

Planning Forms   79  
• You may choose to only distribute a milestone chart that shows only the dates of the important
events or key deliverables. The sample milestone chart is for constructing a house. It shows the
activity milestones as well as their dependencies. Showing dependencies on a milestone chart is
optional.

Alignment
The project schedule should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project charter
• Assumption log
• Schedule management plan
• Project roadmap
• Scope baseline
• Activity list
• Network diagram
• Duration estimates
• Project team assignments
• Project calendars

Preparation

Design kitchen layout

Design cabinet layout

Select materials

Purchase materials

Preparation complete

Build cabinet framing

Stain and finish cabinet framing

Make cabinet doors

Stain and finish doors

Make doors

Stain and finish drawers

Make shelving

Stain and finish shelving

Construction complete

1.1

1.1.1

1.1.2

1.1.3

1.1.4

1.1.5

1.2

1.2.1

1.2.2

1.2.3

1.2.4

1.2.5

1.2.6

1.2.7

1.2.8

1.2.9

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

Install cabinets

Install drawers

1.3.2

1.3.3

1.4

20

21

22

Sign off

Install cabinet framing

19

Installation

1.3

1.3.1

18

Construction

Kitchen Cabinets

1

1

Task Name

WBS

ID

Judy

George

Mike

Mark

Oct 2

10/2

9/26

George

Mark

6

Oct 2

George

Jake

George

Mark

3

9

October 2008

9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30

Oct 2

6

Mark

8/20

Mark

Page 1 of 2

Mark

John

3

September 2008

10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31

Oct 2

7

Oct 2

4

August 2008

Mark

Oct 1

Oct 2

Sep 26

Sep 17

Sep 16

Sep 18

Sep 17

Sep 26

Sep 24

Sep 12

Sep 10

Sep 26

Aug 20

Aug 20

Aug 15

Aug 12

Aug 8

Aug 20

Oct 2

Finish

Oct 2

Sep 29

Sep 29

Sep 26

Sep 17

Sep 11

Sep 18

Sep 11

Sep 25

Sep 11

Sep 11

Aug 21

Aug 21

Aug 20

Aug 18

Aug 13

Aug 6

Aug 4

Aug 4

Aug 4

Start

Sample Gantt Chart

PROJECT SCHEDULE

12 15 18 21 24 27

Vendors selected
Financing obtained
Plans complete
Permits obtained
Paving complete
Foundation complete
House framed
Roof set
Power established
Power complete
Plumbing complete
HVAC complete
Finish work complete
Garden site prepared
City sign-off
Punch list closed

1

16

15

14

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

Task Name

ID

Page 2 of 2

Mar 3
Mar 3
Apr 11
May 2
May 2
May 14
Jun 13
Jun 20
Jun 20
Jul 11
Aug 22
Aug 22
Sep 26
Oct 10
Oct 10
Oct 17

Finish

3/3

5/14

5/2

5/2

4/11

7/11

6/20

6/20

6/13

8/22

8/22

10/17

10/10

10/10

9/26

Qtr 3, 2008
Qtr 4, 2008
Qtr 2, 2008
Qtr
Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Ja
3/3

Sample Milestone Chart

PROJECT SCHEDULE

82   Planning Forms

2.19 Cost Management Plan
The cost management plan is a part of the project management plan. It specifies how the project costs will
be estimated, structured, monitored, and controlled. The cost management plan can include the following
information:
• Level of accuracy for cost estimates
• Units of measure
• Variance thresholds
• Rules for performance measurement
• Cost reporting information and format
• Process for estimating costs
• Process for developing a time-phased budget
• Process for monitoring and controlling costs
In addition, the cost management plan may include information on the level of authority associated
with cost and budget allocation and commitment, funding limitations, and options and guidelines on how
and when costs get recorded for the project.
The cost management plan can receive information from the:
• Project charter
• Schedule management plan
• Risk management plan
It provides information to:
• Activity cost estimates
• Cost baseline
• Risk register
The cost management plan is an output from the process 7.1 Plan Cost Management in the PMBOK®
Guide – Sixth Edition. It is developed once and does not usually change.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the cost management plan to meet your needs:
• On smaller projects, often the project manager does not manage the budget. In those cases you
would not need this form.
• Units of measure for each type of resource may be indicated in the cost management plan or the
resource management plan.
• For projects that use earned value management, include information on rules for establishing percent
complete, the EVM measurement techniques (fixed formula, percent complete, level or effort, etc.).
For those that don’t, delete this field.

Alignment
The cost management plan should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project charter
• Schedule management plan

Planning Forms   83  
Description
You can use the descriptions in Table 2.17 to assist you in developing a cost management plan.
Table 2.17 Elements of a Cost Management Plan
Document Element

Description

Units of measure

Indicate how each type of resource will be measured. For example, labor units may
be measured in staff hours, days, or weeks. Physical resources may be measured in
gallons, meters, tons, or whatever is appropriate for the material. Some resources are
based on a lump sum cost each time they are used.

Level of precision

Indicate whether cost estimates will be rounded to hundreds, thousands, or some
other measurement.

Level of accuracy

Describe the level of accuracy needed for estimates. The level of accuracy may
evolve over time as more information is known (progressive elaboration). If there are
guidelines for rolling wave planning and the level of refinement that will be used for
cost estimates, indicate the levels of accuracy required as time progresses.

Organizational procedure
links

Cost estimating and reporting should follow the numbering structure of the WBS. It
may also need to follow the organization’s code of accounts or other accounting and
reporting structures.

Control thresholds

Indicate the measures that determine whether an activity, work package, or the
project as a whole is on budget, requires preventive action, or is over budget and
requires corrective action. Usually indicated as a percent deviation from the baseline.

Rules of performance
measurement

Identify the level in the WBS where progress and expenditures will be measured. For
projects that use earned value management indicate whether costs will be reported
at the work package or control account level. Describe the measurement method
that will be used, such as weighted milestones, fixed-formula, percent complete, etc.
Document the equations that will be used to forecast estimates to complete (ETC)
and estimates at completion (EAC).

Cost reporting information
and format

Document the cost information required for status and progress reporting. If a specific reporting format will be used, attach a copy or refer to the specific form or template. Indicate the reporting frequency.

Additional details

Describe variables associated with strategic funding choices, such as make or buy,
buy or lease, borrowing funds versus using in-house funding, etc.

COST MANAGEMENT PLAN
Project title:
units of Measure:

Date Prepared:
level of Precision:

organizational Procedure links:

control thresholds:

rules of Performance Measurement:

cost reporting and Format:

additional Details:

Page 1 of 1

level of accuracy:

Planning Forms   85  

2.20 Cost Estimates
Cost estimates provide information on the cost of resources necessary to complete project work, including
labor, equipment, supplies, services, facilities, and material. Estimates can be determined by developing an
approximation for each work package using expert judgment or by using a quantitative method such as:
• Parametric estimates
• Analogous estimates
• Three-point estimates
Cost estimates should include at least:
• ID
• Labor costs
• Physical resource costs
• Reserve
• Estimate
• Basis of estimates
• Method
• Assumptions
• Range
• Confidence level
Cost estimates can receive information from:
• Cost management plan
• Scope baseline
• Project schedule
• Quality management plan
• Resource requirements
• Risk register
• Lessons learned register
They provide information to:
• Cost baseline
• Resource requirements
• Risk register
Cost estimates are an output from the process 7.2 Estimate Costs in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth
Edition. Cost estimates are developed and then refined periodically as needed.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the cost estimates to meet your needs:
• Cost estimates may include contingency reserve to account for risks related to uncertainty in the
Cost estimates or ambiguity in the scope or resource availability.
• If considerations for the cost of quality, cost of financing, or indirect costs were included, add that
information to your cost estimate.

86   Planning Forms
• Estimate costs at the level of accuracy and precision that suits your project needs. Rolling wave
planning is often used for cost estimating; as more information is known about the scope and
resources, cost estimates are refined and updated.
• If using vendors, indicate the estimated cost and indicate the type of contract being used to account
for possible fees and awards.

Alignment
The cost estimates should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Assumption log
• Activity attributes
• Project schedule
• Resource requirements
• Project team assignments

Description
You can use the descriptions in Table 2.18 to assist you in developing the cost estimates.
Table 2.18 Elements of an Activity Cost Estimate
Document Element

Description

ID

Unique identifier, such as the WBS ID or activity ID

Resource

The resource (person, equipment, material) needed for the WBS deliverable

Labor costs

The costs associated with team or outsourced resources

Physical costs

Costs associated with material, equipment, supplies, or other physical resources

Reserve

Document contingency reserve amounts, if any

Estimate

The sum of the cost of labor, physical resources, and reserve costs

Basis of estimates

Information such as cost per pound, duration of the work, square feet, etc.

Method

The method used to estimate the cost, such as analogous, parametric, etc.

Assumptions/constraints

Assumptions used to estimate the cost, such as the length of time the resource will
be needed

Range

The range of estimate

Confidence level

The degree of confidence in the estimate

Page 1 of 1

Method

Assumptions/
Constraints

Labor Physical
Reserve Estimate
Costs Costs

WBS
ID

Resource

Date Prepared:

Project Title:

Basis of Estimates

ACTIVITY COST ESTIMATES

Range

Confidence
Level

88   Planning Forms

2.21 Cost Estimating Worksheet
A cost estimating worksheet can help to develop cost estimates when quantitative methods or a bottomup estimate are developed. Quantitative methods include:
• Parametric estimates
• Analogous estimates
• Three-point estimates
Parametric estimates are derived by determining the cost variable that will be used and the cost per
unit. The number of units is multiplied by the cost per unit to derive a cost estimate.
Analogous estimates are derived by comparing current work to previous similar work. The size of the
previous work and the cost are compared to the expected size of the current work. Then the ratio of the
size of the current work compared to the previous work is multiplied by the previous cost to determine an
estimate. Various factors, such as complexity and price increases, can be factored in to make the estimate
more accurate. This type of estimate is generally used to get a high-level estimate when detailed information is not available.
A three-point estimate can be used to account for uncertainty in the cost estimate. Stakeholders provide estimates for optimistic, most likely, and pessimistic scenarios. These estimates are put into an equation to determine an expected cost. The needs of the project determine the appropriate equation, though
a common equation is a beta distribution:
Estimated cost =

Optimistic Cost + 4 (Most Likely Cost) + Pessimistic Cost
6

Bottom-up estimates are detailed estimates done at the work package level. Detailed information on
the work package, such as technical requirements, engineering drawings, labor duration, and other direct
and indirect costs are used to determine the most accurate estimate possible.
The cost estimating worksheet can receive information from:
• Cost management plan
• Scope baseline
• Project schedule
• Quality management plan
• Resource requirements
• Risk register
• Lessons learned register
Cost estimating worksheets are process 7.2 Estimate Costs in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition.
Cost estimating worksheets are developed and then refined as periodically as needed.

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.19 to assist you in developing a cost estimating worksheet and the element descriptions in Table 2.20 to assist you in developing a bottom-up cost estimating
worksheet.

Planning Forms   89  
Table 2.19 Elements of a Cost Estimating Worksheet
Document Element

Description

ID

Unique identifier, such as the WBS ID or activity ID

Parametric estimates
Cost variable

Enter the cost estimating driver, such as hours, square feet, gallons, or some other
quantifiable measure.
Example: Square feet

Cost per unit

Record the cost per unit.
Example: $9.50

Number of units

Enter the number of units.
Example: 36

Cost estimate

Multiply the number of units times the cost per unit to calculate the estimate.
Example: $9.50 x 36 = $342

Analogous estimates
Previous activity

Enter a description of the previous activity.
Example: Build a 160 square foot deck.

Previous cost

Document the cost of the previous activity.
Example: $5,000

Current activity

Describe how the current activity is different.
Example: Build a 200 square foot deck.

Multiplier

Divide the current activity by the previous activity to get a multiplier.
Example: 200/160 = 1.25

Cost Estimate

Multiply the cost for the previous activity by the multiplier to calculate the Cost
Estimate for the current activity.
Example: $5,000 x 1.25 = $6,250

Three-point estimate (Beta distribution)
Optimistic cost

Determine an optimistic cost estimate. Optimistic estimates assume all costs were
identified and there won’t be any cost increases in material, labor, or other cost drivers.
Example: $4,000

Most likely cost

Determine a most likely cost estimate. Most likely estimates assume that there will be
some cost fluctuations but nothing out of the ordinary.
Example: $5,000

Pessimistic cost

Determine a pessimistic cost estimate. Pessimistic estimates assume there are significant risks that will materialize and cause cost overruns.
Example: $7,500

Weighting equation

Weight the three estimates and divide. The most common method of weighting is the
beta distribution, where c = cost:
cE = ( cO + c4M + cP ) /6

(

)

Example: 4,000 + 4 ( 5,000 ) /6
Expected cost

Enter the expected cost based on the beta distribution.
Example: $5,250

90   Planning Forms
You can use the element descriptions in the following table to assist you in developing a bottom-up
cost estimating worksheet.
Table 2.20 Elements of a Bottom-Up Cost Estimating Worksheet
Document Element

Description

ID

Unique identifier, such as the WBS ID or activity ID

Labor hours

Enter the estimated effort hours.

Labor rate

Enter the hourly or daily rate.

Total labor

Multiply the labor hours times the labor rate.

Material

Enter quotes for material, either from vendors or multiply the amount of material times
the cost per unit.

Supplies

Enter quotes for supplies, either from vendors or multiply the amount of supplies
times the cost per unit.

Equipment

Enter quotes to rent, lease, or purchase equipment.

Travel

Enter quotes for travel.

Other direct costs

Enter any other direct costs and document the type of cost.

Indirect costs

Enter any indirect costs, such as overhead.

Reserve

Enter any contingency reserve cost for the work package.

Estimate

Sum the labor, materials, supplies, equipment, travel, other direct costs, indirect
costs, and any contingency reserve.

COST ESTIMATING WORKSHEET
Project title:

Date Prepared:
Parametric estimates

iD

cost variable

cost per unit

number of
units

cost estimate

analogous estimates
iD

Previous
activity

Previous cost

current activity

Multiplier

cost estimate

Weighting
equation

expected cost
estimate

three-Point estimates
iD

optimistic cost

Most likely
cost

Pessimistic
cost

Page 1 of 2

iD

labor
hours

Project title:

labor
rate

total
labor

Page 2 of 2

Material Supplies equipment

travel

Date Prepared:
other Direct
costs

indirect
costs
reserve

BOTTOM-UP COST ESTIMATING WORKSHEET

estimate

Planning Forms   93  

2.22 Cost Baseline
The cost baseline is a time-phased budget that is used to measure, monitor, and control cost performance for
the project. It is developed by summing the costs of the project by the time period and developing a cumulative cost curve that can be used to track actual performance, planned performance, and the funds spent.
A project may have multiple cost baselines; for example, the project manager may keep a separate
baseline for labor or procurements. The baseline may or may not include contingency funds or indirect
costs. When earned value measurements are being used, the baseline may be called the performance
measurement baseline.
The cost baseline can receive information from:
• Scope baseline
• Cost management plan
• Cost estimates
• Project schedule
• Resource management plan
• Risk register
• Agreements (contracts)
It provides information to:
• Project management plan
• Risk register
The cost baseline is an output from process 7.3 Determine Budget in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth
Edition. This is developed once and is not expected to change unless there is a significant change
in scope.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the cost baseline to meet your needs:
• The cost baseline generally includes contingency reserve to account for known risks. It does not
generally include management reserve. Management reserve is held above the cost baseline, but
is considered part of the project budget. If your company policies differ, the reserve in your baseline
may be different.
• Your cost baseline may be displayed to show the funding constraints, funding requirements, or different
sources of funding.
• Your organization may not require a graphic display of the cost baseline; they may require a spreadsheet or internal budgeting system displays instead.

Alignment
The cost baseline should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Assumption log
• Project schedule
• Cost estimates
• Project team assignments
• Risk register
The cost baseline on the following page is displayed in a form called an S-curve.

0

2,000

4,000

6,000

8,000

10,000

12,000

14,000

Project Title:

1

2

3

Page 1 of 1

4

Date Prepared:

COST BASELINE

5

6

7

Planning Forms   95  

2.23 Quality Management Plan
The quality management plan is a component of the project management plan. It describes how applicable policies, procedures, and guidelines will be implemented to achieve the quality objectives for the
project. Information in the quality management plan can include:
• Quality standards that will be used on the project
• Quality objectives
• Quality roles and responsibilities
• Deliverables and processes subject to quality review
• Quality control and quality management activities for the project
• Quality procedures applicable for the project
The quality management plan can receive information from:
• Project charter
• Assumption log
• Stakeholder register
• Requirements management plan
• Risk management plan
• Stakeholder engagement plan
• Scope baseline
• Requirements documentation
• Requirements traceability matrix
• Risk register
It provides information to:
• Scope management plan
• Cost estimates
• Resource management plan
• Risk register
• Procurement documents (RFP, RFQ)
The quality management plan is an output from process 8.1 Plan Quality Management in the PMBOK®
Guide – Sixth Edition. This is developed once and is not usually changed.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the quality management plan to meet your needs:
• On smaller projects quality, requirements, and scope are often handled as a single aspect, whereas
in larger projects they are separated out and may have distinct roles and responsibilities for each
aspect.
• In many industries there are specific standards that must be adhered to. Your quality management
plan may reference these by citing specific regulations, or they may be integrated into organizational
policies and procedures.
• Quality management planning must be consistent with your organization’s quality policies, processes, and procedures.

96   Planning Forms
Alignment
The quality management plan should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project charter
• Scope management plan
• Requirements management plan
• Resource management plan
• Procurement documents (RFP, RFQ, etc.)

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.21 to assist you in developing a quality management plan.
Table 2.21 Elements of a Quality Management Plan
Document Element

Description

Quality standards

Quality standards are usually industry or product driven. They may be ISO
standards, IEEE, or some other regulatory or industry body.

Quality objectives

Quality objectives are the measures that must be achieved by the project or
product components to meet the stakeholder needs. Objectives are the target
you want to achieve. You may have metrics or specifications that provide a
quantifiable measurement of success.

Quality roles and responsibilities

Define the roles necessary to conduct quality activities on the project and the
responsibilities associated with each.

Deliverables and processes
subject to quality review

The key deliverables that have metrics or measures associated with quality
objectives
The processes used in the project that require verification or validation that they
are being performed correctly, or in accordance with quality requirements or
objectives

Quality management approach

The approach that will be used to manage the quality process. Includes the
timing and content of project and product quality audits.

Quality control approach

The approach that will be used to measure the product and the project performance to ensure the product meets the quality objectives

Applicable quality procedures

Procedures that will be used for the project, such as
• Nonconformance and rework
• Corrective actions
• Quality audits
• Continuous improvement

QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN
Project title:

Date Prepared:

quality Standards

quality objectives
Metric or Specification

Measure

1.

1.

2.

2.

3.

3.

4.

4.

quality roles and responsibilities
roles

responsibilities

1.

1.

2.

2.

3.

3.

Page 1 of 2

QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN
Deliverables and Processes Subject to quality review
Deliverables

Processes

quality Management approach

quality control approach

applicable quality Procedures

Page 2 of 2

Planning Forms   99  

2.24 Quality Metrics
Quality metrics provide specific detailed measurements about a project or product attribute, and how it
should be measured to verify compliance. Metrics are consulted in the manage quality process to ensure
that the processes used will meet the metric. The deliverables or processes are measured in the control
quality phase and compared to the metric to determine if the result is acceptable or if corrective action or
rework is required.
Quality metrics can receive information from:
• Project management plan
• Requirements documentation
• Stakeholder register
Quality metrics are an output from process 8.1 Plan Quality Management in the PMBOK® Guide –
Sixth Edition. They are generally determined as the requirements are developed. If requirements are stable,
they will be developed once. If requirements are evolving or changing, they will evolve and change as well.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the quality metrics to meet your needs:
• On smaller projects quality metrics, requirements, and specifications are considered the same thing.
Different industries may use the term “specifications” rather than “metrics.”
• In many industries there are specific standards that include metrics. These must be adhered to in
your project. Your quality management plan may reference these by citing specific regulations, or
they may be integrated into organizational policies and procedures.

Alignment
The quality metrics should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Requirements documentation
• Quality management plan

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.22 to assist you in documenting quality metrics.
Table 2.22 Elements of Quality Metrics
Document Element

Description

ID

Unique identifier. This can be the WBS ID or activity ID number.

Item

Describe the attribute to be measured.

Metric

The specific, quantifiable measurement

Measurement method

The method of measuring, including any equipment or procedures

QUALITY METRICS
Project title:
iD

Date Prepared:
item

Metric

Page 1 of 1

Measurement Method

Planning Forms   101  

2.25 Responsibility Assignment Matrix
The responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) shows the intersection of work packages and resources.
Generally, RAMs are used to show the different levels of participation on a work package by various team
members rather than physical resources. RAMs can indicate different types of participation depending on
the needs of the project. Some common types include:
• Accountable
• Responsible
• Consulted
• Resource
• Informed
• Sign-off
The RAM always should include a key that explains what each of the levels of participation entails. An
example follows using a RACI chart, as demonstrated in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. The needs of
your project should determine the fields for the RAM you use.
The responsibility assignment matrix can receive information from:
• Scope baseline
• Requirements documentation
• Stakeholder register
It is a data representation tool that provides information to the resource management plan in process
9.1 Plan Resource Management in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. It is progressively elaborated as
more information about the scope and the resource requirements is known.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the RAM to meet your needs:
• Tailor the types of participation appropriate for your project. Some projects require “sign-off” of specific
deliverables, whereas others use the term “approve.”
• Determine the appropriate level to record information on the RAM. Large projects with multiple vendors
and large deliverables often use the RAM as the intersection of the WBS and the OBS (organizational
breakdown structure). Small projects may use it at the deliverable or activity level to help enter schedule
information.

Alignment
The RAM should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Work breakdown structure
• Requirements documentation
• Resource requirements
• Procurement documents (RFP, RFQ, etc.)

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.23 to assist you in developing a responsibility assignment
matrix.

102   Planning Forms
Table 2.23 Elements of a Responsibility Assignment Matrix
Document Element

Description

Work package

Name of the work package you are assigning resources to. The RAM can be
used at the work package level, control account level, or activity level.

Resource

Identify the person, division, or organization that will be working on the project.

RESPONSIBILITY ASSIGNMENT MATRIX
Project title:

Work package 1

Date Prepared:
Person 1

Person 2

Person 3

r

c

a

Person 4

etc.

i

r

Work package 2

a

Work package 3

r

r

a

c

Work package 4

a

r

i

Work package 5

c

r

r

Work package 6

r

Etc.

c

a

a

a

i

r

r

r = Responsible: The person performing the work.
c = Consult: The person who has information necessary to complete the work.
a = Accountable: The person who is answerable to the project manager that the work is done on
time, meets requirements, and is acceptable.
i = Inform: This person should be notified when the work is complete.

Page 1 of 1

104   Planning Forms

2.26 Resource Management Plan
The resource management plan is part of the project management plan. It provides guidance on how team
and physical resources should be allocated, managed, and released. Information in the resource management plan includes:
• Estimating methods used to identify the type, number, and skill level of team resources
• Information on how project team members will be acquired and released
• Roles and responsibilities associated with the project
• Project organizational chart
• Training requirements
• Rewards and recognition
• Team development
• Methods used to identify the type, amount, and grade of physical resources
• Information on how physical resources will be acquired
• Methods for managing physical resources, such as inventory, supply chain, and logistics
The resource management plan can receive information from:
• Project charter
• Quality management plan
• Scope baseline
• Project schedule
• Requirements documentation
• Risk register
• Stakeholder register
It provides information to:
• Project budget
• Resource requirements
• Resource breakdown structure
• Team performance assessments
• Communications management plan
• Risk register
• Procurement management plan
The resource management plan is an output from 9.1 Plan Resource Management in the PMBOK®
Guide – Sixth Edition. It is generally developed once and does not change.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the resource management plan to meet your needs:
• If you need to bring in outside contractors for the project you will need to include information on how
to on-board them to the project. You will also need to consider how to ensure they have all the information they need, but no access to proprietary data. This may include a “non-disclosure agreement”
or similar forms.
• For any team or physical resources that are acquired from outside the organization you will need to
work with procurement policies for the organization and the project.

Planning Forms   105  
• Projects with large amounts of inventory, supplies, or material should either reference organizational
policies regarding managing physical resources, or provide sufficient detail to ensure appropriate
control.

Alignment
The resource management plan should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Work breakdown structure
• Requirements documentation
• Quality management plan
• Procurement management plan

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.24 to assist you in developing a resource management plan.

106   Planning Forms
Table 2.24 Elements of a Resource Management Plan
Document Element

Description

Team member identification

Methods used to identify the skill sets needed and the level of skill
needed. This includes techniques to estimate the number of resources
needed, such as information from past projects, parametric estimates,
or industry standards.

Team member acquisition

Document how staff will be brought on to the project. Describe any differences between internal team members and contract team members
with regard to on-boarding procedures.

Team member management

Document how team members will be managed and eventually
released from the team. Management methods may vary depending on the relative authority of the project manager and whether
team members are internal to the organization or contract staff.
Team member release should include methods for knowledge
transfer.

Project organizational chart

Create a hierarchy chart to show the project reporting and organizational structure.

Roles and responsibilities

Provide information on the following:
Role. Identify the role or job title and a brief description of the role.
Authority. Define the decision-making, approval, and influence levels
for each role. Examples include alternative selection, conflict management, prioritizing, rewarding and penalizing, etc.
Responsibility. Define the activities that each role carries out, such as
job duties, processes involved, and the hand-offs to other roles.
Qualifications. Describe any prerequisites, experience, licenses,
seniority levels, or other qualifications necessary to fulfill the role.
Competencies. Describe specific role or job skills and capacities
required to complete the work. May include details on languages,
technology, or other information necessary to complete the roles
successfully.

Training requirements

Describe any required training on equipment, technology, or company processes. Include information on how and when training will be
accomplished.

Rewards and recognition

Describe any reward and recognition processes and limitations.

Team development

Describe methods for developing individual team members and the
team as a whole.

Physical resource identification

Methods used to identify the materials, equipment, and supplies
needed to complete the work. This includes units of measure and
techniques to estimate the amount of resources needed, such as
information from past projects, parametric estimates, or industry
standards.

Physical resource acquisition

Document how equipment, materials, and supplies will be acquired.
This can include buy, lease, rent, or pull from inventory. In the event
resources are acquired, ensure alignment with procurement management processes.

Physical resource management

Document how materials, equipment, and supplies will be managed to
ensure they are available when needed. This can include appropriate
inventory, supply chain, and logistics information.

RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN
Date Prepared:

Project title:
team Member identification and estimates
role

number

Skill level

1.

1.

1.

2.

2.

2.

3.

3.

3.

4.

4.

4.

5.

5.

5.

6.

6.

6.

Staff acquisition

Staff release:

roles, responsibilities, and authority
role

responsibility

authority

1.

1.

1.

2.

2.

2.

3.

3.

3.

4.

4.

4.

5.

5.

5.

6.

6.

6.

Project organizational Structure

Page 1 of 2

RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN
training requirements

rewards and recognition

team Development

Physical resource identification and estimates
resource

amount

grade

1.

1.

1.

2.

2.

2.

3.

3.

3.

4.

4.

4.

5.

5.

5.

6.

6.

6.

resource acquisition

resource Management

Page 2 of 2

Planning Forms   109  

2.27 Team Charter
The team charter is used to establish ground rules and guidelines for the team. It is particularly useful on
virtual teams and teams that are comprised of members from different organizations. Using a team charter
can help establish expectations and agreements on working effectively together. The contents of the team
charter typically include:
• Team values and principles
• Meeting guidelines
• Communication guidelines
• Decision-making process
• Conflict resolution process
• Team agreements
The team charter is an output from 9.1 Plan Resource Management in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth
Edition. It is generally developed once and does not change; however, if there is substantial team member
turnover, the team should periodically revisit the team charter and reaffirm or update it accordingly.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the team charter to meet your needs:
• If you bring in contractors for key roles in the project you should include them in developing the team
charter.
• If your organization has organizational values, make sure your team charter is aligned with the organizational values.
• International teams may need to spend more time developing this document as different cultures
have different ways of making decisions and resolving conflicts.

Alignment
The team charter should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Resource management plan

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.25 to assist you in developing a team charter.

110   Planning Forms
Table 2.25 Elements of a Team Charter
Document Element

Description

Team values and principles

List values and principles that the team agrees to operate within. Examples
include mutual respect, operating from fact not opinion, etc.

Meeting guidelines

Identify guidelines that will keep meetings productive. Examples include decision makers must be present, start on time, stick to the agenda, etc.

Communication guidelines

List guidelines used for effective communication.
Examples include everyone voices their opinion, no dominating the conversation, no interrupting, not using inflammatory language, etc.

Decision-making process

Describe the process used to make decisions. Indicate the relative power of
the project manager for decision making as well as any voting procedures.
Also indicate the circumstances under which a decision can be revisited.

Conflict resolution process

Describe the process for managing conflict, when a conflict will be escalated,
when it should be tabled for later discussion, etc.

Other agreements

List any other agreements or approaches to ensuring a collaborative and
productive working relationship among team members.

TEAM CHARTER
Project title:

Date Prepared:

team values and Principles:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Meeting guidelines:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
communication guidelines:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Decision-Making Process:

Page 1 of 2

TEAM CHARTER
conflict resolution Process:

other agreements:

Signature:

Date:

Page 2 of 2

Planning Forms   113  

2.28 Resource Requirements
The resource requirements describe the type and quantity of resources needed to complete the project
work. Resources include:
• People
• Equipment
• Material
• Supplies
• Locations (as needed)
Locations can include training rooms, testing sites, and so on.
The activity resource requirements can receive information from:
• Assumption log
• Resource management plan
• Scope baseline
• Activity list
• Activity attributes
• Cost estimates resource calendars
• Risk register
It provides information to:
• Duration estimating worksheet
• Project schedule
• Cost estimating worksheet
• Risk register
• Procurement management plan
The resource requirements form is an output from process 9.2 Estimate Activity Resources in the PMBOK®
Guide – Sixth Edition. Resource requirements are based on the project scope. Therefore, if the scope is known and
stable, the requirements should remain relatively stable. If the scope is evolving, the resource requirements will
evolve as well. The resource requirements will become more detailed and more stable over time.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the resource requirements to meet your needs:
• You may want to divide the form into two sections—one for team resources and one for physical
resources. As an alternative you can have one section for internal resources and one section for contracted or purchased resources.
• Consider adding a column that includes the basis of estimates. This can include supporting detail
such as:
○○ Method used for estimating the quantities
○○ Range of estimates
○○ Confidence level of estimates
○○ Constraints or risks associated with the resource
• For projects with large amounts of inventory, supplies, or material you may want to document support requirements, such as inventory, supply chain, and logistical requirements.

114   Planning Forms
Alignment
The resource requirements should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project schedule
• Cost estimates
• Bid documents

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.26 to assist you in developing resource requirements.
Table 2.26 Elements of Resource Requirements
Document Element

Description

ID

Unique identifier

Type of resource

Indicate whether the resource is a team resource or physical resource. If physical, indicate if it is equipment, supplies, material, location, or some other form
of resource.

Quantity

Document the number or quantity of the resource needed for the activity.
Indicate the unit of measure used for estimating resources.

Assumptions

Enter assumptions associated with the resource, such as availability, certifications, etc.

Comments

Include information on basis of estimate, grade, competency, or other relevant
information.

iD

Project title:

resource

Page 1 of 1

quantity

assumptions

Date Prepared:

RESOURCE REQUIREMENTS

comments

116   Planning Forms

2.29 Resource Breakdown Structure
The resource breakdown structure is a hierarchical structure used to organize the resources by type and
category. It can be shown as a hierarchical chart or as an outline.
The resource breakdown structure can receive information from:
• Assumption log
• Resource management plan
• Scope baseline
• Activity attributes
It provides information to:
• Duration estimates worksheet
The resource breakdown structure is an output from process 9.2 Estimate Activity Resources in the
PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. Resources are based on the project scope. Therefore, if the scope is
known and stable, the requirements should remain relatively stable. If the scope is evolving, the resource
requirements will evolve as well.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the resource breakdown structure to meet your needs:
• For projects with many different types of team resources you may want to decompose the team
branch further by including information on skill level, required certifications, location, or other
information.
• For projects that have different locations you may want to organize the resource breakdown structure
by geography.

Alignment
The resource breakdown structure should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Resource management plan
• Resource requirements

RESOURCE BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
Project title:

1.

Date Prepared:

Project
1.1. People
1.1.1.

1.1.2.

Quantity of Role 1
1.1.1.1.

Quantity of Level 1

1.1.1.2.

Quantity of Level 2

1.1.1.3.

Quantity of Level 3

Quantity of Role 2

1.2. Equipment
1.2.1.

Quantity of Type 1

1.2.2.

Quantity of Type 2

1.3. Materials
1.3.1.

Quantity of Material 1
1.3.1.1.

Quantity of Grade 1

1.3.1.2.

Quantity of Grade 2

1.4. Supplies
1.4.1.

Quantity of Supply 1

1.4.2.

Quantity of Supply 2

1.5. Locations
1.5.1.

Location 1

1.5.2.

Location 2

Page 1 of 1

118   Planning Forms

2.30 Communications Management Plan
The communications management plan is a component of the project management plan. It describes how
project communications will be planned, structured, implemented, and monitored for effectiveness. Typical
information includes:
• Stakeholder communication requirements
• Information
• Method or media
• Time frame and frequency
• Sender
• Communication assumptions and constraints
• Glossary of common terminology
In addition, the communications management plan can include resources, time, and budgets associated with communication activities, methods for addressing sensitive or proprietary information, and
methods for updating the communications management plan.
The communications management plan can receive information from:
• Project charter
• Requirements documentation
• Resource management plan
• Stakeholder register
• Stakeholder engagement plan
It provides information to:
• Stakeholder register
• Stakeholder engagement plan
The communications management plan is an output from process 10.1 Plan Communications
Management in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. It is updated periodically throughout the project as
stakeholders are added and leave the project and as communications needs emerge and shift.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the communications management plan to meet your needs:
• When multiple organizations are working on a project there will be additional information needed,
such as:
○○ Person responsible for authorizing release of internal or confidential information
○○ How different communication hardware, software, and technologies will be addressed to ensure
information gets to everyone regardless of their communication infrastructure
• If you have a multinational team your plan will need to account for the business language, currency
unit of measure, translation, and other factors required to ensure effective communication across
multiple countries and cultures.
• On a project that has a significant communication component you will want to identify the resources
allocated for communication activities, the time requirements, and the budget allocated.
• For projects with complex communication needs, include a flowchart of the sequence of communication events.

Planning Forms   119  
Alignment
The communications management plan should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project schedule
• Stakeholder register
• Stakeholder engagement plan

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.27 to assist you in developing the communications management plan.
Table 2.27 Elements of a Communications Management Plan
Document Element

Description

Stakeholder communication
requirements

The people or the groups of people who need to receive project information
and their specific requirements

Information

Describe the information to be communicated, including language, format,
content, and level of detail.

Method or media

Describe how the information will be delivered; for example, email, meetings,
web meetings, etc.

Time frame and frequency

List how often the information is to be provided and under what circumstances.

Sender

Insert the name of the person or the group that will provide the information.

Communication constraints or
assumptions

List any assumptions or constraints. Constraints can include descriptions
of proprietary, secure, or sensitive information and relevant restrictions for
distribution.

Glossary of common terminology

List any terms or acronyms unique to the project or that are used in a
unique way.

assumptions

Stakeholder

information

attach relevant communication diagrams or flowcharts.

glossary of terms or acronyms:

Project title:

Page 1 of 1

Method

Date Prepared:

constraints

timing or Frequency

COMMUNICATIONS MANAGEMENT PLAN

Sender

Planning Forms   121  

2.31 Risk Management Plan
The risk management plan is a component of the project management plan. It describes how risk management activities will be structured and performed for both threats and opportunities. Typical information
includes:
• Risk strategy
• Methodology
• Roles and responsibilities for risk management
• Funding to identify, analyze, and respond to risk
• Frequency and timing for risk management activities
• Risk categories
• Stakeholder risk appetite
• Definitions of probability
• Definitions of impact by objective
• Probability and impact matrix template
• Methods to track and audit risk management activities
• Risk report formats
The risk management plan can receive information from:
• Project charter
• Project management plan (any component)
• Stakeholder register
It provides information to:
• Cost management plan
• Quality management plan
• Risk register
• Stakeholder engagement plan
The risk management plan is an input to all the other risk management processes. It describes the
approach to all other risk management processes and provides key information needed to conduct those
processes successfully.
The risk management plan is an output from process 11.1 Plan Risk Management in the PMBOK®
Guide – Sixth Edition. It is developed once and does not usually change.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the risk management plan to meet your needs:
• For a small, simple, or short-term project you can use a simplified risk register with a 3 × 3 probability
and impact matrix. You would also include risk information in the project status report rather than a
separate risk report.
• For larger, longer, and more complex projects you will want to develop a robust risk management
process, including a more granular probability and impact matrix, quantitative assessments for the
schedule and budget baselines, risk audits, and risk reports.
• Projects that are using an agile approach will address risk at the start of each iteration and during the
retrospective.

122   Planning Forms
Alignment
The risk management plan should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Scope management plan
• Schedule management plan
• Cost management plan
• Quality management plan
• Resource management plan
• Procurement management plan
• Stakeholder engagement plan

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.28 to assist you in developing the risk management plan.

Planning Forms   123  
Table 2.28 Elements of a Risk Management Plan
Document Element

Description

Strategy

The general approach to managing risk on the project

Methodology

Describe the methodology or approach to the risk management. This includes
any tools, approaches, or data sources that will be used.

Roles and responsibilities

Document the roles and responsibilities for various risk management activities.

Risk categories

Identify categorization groups used to sort and organize risks. These can be
used to sort risks on the risk register or for a risk breakdown structure, if one
is used.

Risk management funding

Document the funding needed to perform the various risk management activities, such as utilizing expert advice or transferring risks to a third party. Also
establishes protocols for establishing, measuring, and allocating contingency
and management reserves.

Frequency and timing

Determine the frequency of conducting formal risk management activities and
the timing of any specific activities.

Stakeholder risk appetite

Identify the risk thresholds of the organization(s) and key stakeholders on the
project with regard to each objective.

Risk tracking and audit

Document how risk activities will be recorded and how risk management processes will be audited.

Definitions of probability

Document how probability will be measured and defined. Include the scale
used and the definition for each level in the probability scale. The probability
definitions should reflect the stakeholder risk appetite. For example:
Very high = there is an 80 percent probability or higher that the event will occur
High = there is a 60–80 percent probability that the event will occur
Medium = there is a 40–60 percent probability that the event will occur
Low = there is a 20–40 percent probability that the event will occur
Very low = there is a 1–20 percent probability that the event will occur

Definitions of impact by objective

Document how impact will be measured and defined for either the project as a
whole or for each objective. The probability definitions should reflect the stakeholder risk appetite. Include the scale used and the definition for each level in
the impact scale. For example:
Cost Impacts:
Very high = overrun of control account budget of >20 percent
High = overrun of control account budget between 15–20 percent
Medium = overrun of control account budget between 10–15 percent
Low = overrun of control account budget between 5–10 percent
Very low = overrun of control account budget of <5 percent

Probability and impact matrix

Describe the combinations of probability and impact that indicate a high risk, a
medium risk, and a low risk and the scoring that will be used to prioritize risks.
This can also include an assessment of urgency to indicate how soon the risk
event is likely to occur.

RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN
Project title:

Date Prepared:

Strategy

Methodology

roles and responsibilities
role

responsibility

1.

1.

2.

2.

3.

3.

4.

4.

risk categories

risk Management Funding

contingency Protocols

Page 1 of 4

RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN
Project title:

Date Prepared:

Frequency and timing

Stakeholder risk tolerances

risk tracking and audit

Page 2 of 4

RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN
Definitions of Probability

very high

high

Medium

low

very low

Definitions of impact by objective
Scope

quality

very high
high
Medium
low
very low
Page 3 of 4

time

cost

RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN
Probability and impact Matrix

very high

high

Medium

low

very low

very low

low

Medium

Page 4 of 4

high

very high

128   Planning Forms

2.32 Risk Register
The risk register captures the details of identified individual risks. It documents the results of risk analysis,
risk response planning, response implementation, and current status. It is used to track information about
identified risks over the course of the project. Typical information includes:
• Risk identifier
• Risk statement
• Risk owner
• Probability of occurring
• Impact on objectives if the risk occurs
• Risk score
• Response strategies
• Revised probability
• Revised impact
• Revised score
• Actions
• Status
• Comments
The risk register can receive information from anywhere in the project environment. Some documents
that should be specifically reviewed for input include:
• Assumption log
• Issue log
• Lessons learned register
• Requirements management plan
• Requirements documentation
• Scope baseline
• Schedule management plan
• Duration estimates
• Schedule baseline
• Cost management plan
• Cost estimates
• Cost baseline
• Quality management plan
• Resource management plan
• Resource requirements
• Risk management plan
• Procurement documents
• Agreements
• Stakeholder register
The risk register provides information to:
• Scope statement
• Duration estimates
• Cost estimates
• Quality management plan
• Resource requirements

Planning Forms   129  
• Risk report
• Procurement management plan
• Stakeholder engagement plan
• Lessons learned register
• Project closeout
The risk register is an output from process 11.2 Identify Risks in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. It
is developed at the start of the project and is updated throughout the project.

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.29 to assist you in developing the risk register.
Table 2.29 Elements of a Risk Register
Document Element

Description

Risk ID

Enter a unique risk identifier.

Risk statement

Describe the risk event or condition. A risk statement is usually phrased as “EVENT
may occur, causing IMPACT” or “If CONDITION exists, EVENT may occur, leading to
EFFECT.”

Risk owner

The person responsible for managing and tracking the risk

Probability

Determine the likelihood of the event or condition occurring.

Impact

Describe the impact on one or more of the project objectives.

Score

If you are using numeric scoring, multiply the probability times the impact to determine the risk score. If you are using relative scoring then combine the two scores
(e.g., high-low or medium-high).

Response

Describe the planned response strategy to the risk or condition.

Revised probability

Determine the likelihood of the event or condition occurring after the response has
been implemented.

Revised impact

Describe the impact once the response has been implemented.

Revised score

Enter the revised risk score once the response has been implemented.

Actions

Describe any actions that need to be taken to respond to the risk.

Status

Enter the status as open or closed.

Comments

Provide any comments or additional helpful information about the risk event or
condition.

risk Statement

impact
revised
Probability Scope quality Schedule

iD

Project title:

cost

owner

revised
Score

Page 1 of 1

actions

quality Schedule cost

responsible
Party

Probability Scope

impact

Date Prepared:

RISK REGISTER

Status

Score

comments

response

Planning Forms   131  

2.33 Risk Report
The risk report presents information on overall project risk and summarizes information on individual project risks. It provides information for each of the processes from identification of risks, through analysis,
response planning and implementation, and monitoring risks. Typical information includes:
• Executive summary
• Description of overall project risk
• Description of individual project risks
• Quantitative analysis
• Reserve status
• Risk audit results (if applicable)
The risk report can receive information from anywhere in the project environment. Some documents
that should be specifically reviewed for input include:
• Assumption log
• Issue log
• Lessons learned register
• Risk management plan
• Project performance reports
• Variance analysis
• Earned value status
• Risk audit
• Contractor status reports
The risk report provides information to:
• Lessons learned register
• Project closeout report
The risk report is an output from process 11.2 Identify Risks in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. It is
developed at the start of the project and is updated throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the risk report to meet your needs:
• For a small, simple, or short-term project you can summarize this information in the regular project
status report rather than create a separate risk report.
• Many projects do not include a quantitative risk analysis; if yours does not, omit this information from
the report.
• For larger, longer, and more complex projects you can tailor the quantitative risk analysis techniques
used to those most appropriate to your project.
• For more robust risk reports include appendices that may include the full risk register and quantitative
risk model input (probabilistic distributions, branch correlation groups).

Alignment
The risk report should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Assumption log
• Issue register

132   Planning Forms
• Project performance report
• Risk management plan
• Risk register

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.30 to assist you in developing the risk report.
Table 2.30 Elements of a Risk Report
Document Element

Description

Executive summary

A statement describing the overall project risk exposure and major individual
risks affecting the project, along with the proposed responses for trends.

Overall project risk

Provide a description of the overall risk of the project, including:
• High-level statement of trends
• Significant drivers of overall risk
• Recommended responses to overall risk

Individual project risks

Analyze and summarize information associated with individual project risks,
including:
• Number of risks in each box of the probability impact matrix
• Key metrics
• Active risks
• Newly closed risks
• Risks distribution by category, objective, and score
• Most-critical risks and changes since last report
• Recommended responses to top risks

Quantitative analysis

Summarize the results of quantitative risk analysis, including:
• Results from quantitative assessments (S-curve, tornado, etc.)
• Probability of meeting key project objectives
• Drivers of cost and schedule outcomes
• Proposed responses

Reserve status

Describe the reserve status, such as reserve used, reserve remaining, and an
assessment of the adequacy of the reserve.

Risk audit results (if applicable)

Summarize the results of a risk audit of the risk management processes.

RISK REPORT
Project title:

Date:

executive Summary

overall Project riSk
overall risk Status and trends

Significant Drivers of overall risk

recommended responses

inDiviDual Project riSkS
indicate the number of individual risks in each box below.
VH
H
M
L
VL
VL

L

M
Page 1 of 4

H

VH

RISK REPORT
Metrics
Number of scope risks
Number of schedule risks
Number of cost risks
Number of quality risks
Number of very high probability risks
Number of high probability risks
Number of medium probability risks
Number of active risks
Newly closed risks
critical risks
Top Risks

Responses

1.

1.

2.

2.

3.

3.

4.

4.

5.

5.

changes to critical risks

Page 2 of 4

RISK REPORT
quantitative analysis Summary

Probability of Meeting objectives:
Scope

Schedule

Cost

Quality

Other

range of outcomes
Range of Schedule Outcomes

Range of Cost Outcomes

Key Drivers of Variances

Proposed Responses

reserve Status
Total Cost Reserve

Used to Date

Used This Period

Remaining Reserve

Total Schedule Reserve Used to Date

Used This Period

Remaining Reserve

Page 3 of 4

RISK REPORT
assessment of reserve adequacy

risk audit Summary
Summary of Risk Events

Summary of Risk Management Processes

Summary of Recommendations

Page 4 of 4

Planning Forms   137  

2.34 Probability and Impact Assessment
Definitions for probability and impact are defined in the risk management plan. If your project does not
have a risk management plan, you can develop a probability and impact assessment to record definitions
for the likelihood of events occurring (probability), and the impact on the various project objectives if they
do occur. It also has a key to assign an overall risk rating based on the probability and impact scores.
The probability and impact assessment can receive information from:
• Risk management plan
• Risk register
It provides information to the risk register.
The probability and impact assessment is a tool used in 11.3 Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis in the
PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. It is developed once and does not usually change.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the probability and impact matrix to meet your needs:
• On smaller projects the impacts may be grouped together without distinguishing impact by objective.
• The matrix can be 3 × 3 for a small project, 5 × 5 for a medium project, and 10 × 10 for a complex or
large project.
• To indicate the relative criticality of various objectives (usually scope, schedule, cost, and quality),
you can include a tighter range of thresholds between levels. For example, if cost is a critical factor,
consider a very low impact as a 2 percent variance, a low variance as a 4 percent impact, a medium
variance as a 6 percent variance, a high variance as 8 percent, and a very high variance as a 10 percent variance. If the cost is more relaxed you might have a loose range such as: very low impact as a
5 percent variance, a low variance as a 10 percent impact, a medium variance as a 15 percent variance, a high variance as 20 percent, and a very high variance as a 25 percent variance.
• If there are other objectives that are important to the project, such as stakeholder satisfaction, you
can incorporate them. Some organizations combine scope and quality into one objective.
• You can make the assessment more robust by including urgency information to indicate if a risk is
imminent or in the distant future.

Alignment
The probability and impact assessment should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Risk management plan
• Risk register
• Probability and impact matrix
• Stakeholder register

Description
You can use the assessment descriptions in Table 2.31 to assist you in developing a probability and impact
assessment.

138   Planning Forms
Table 2.31 Elements of a Probability Impact Assessment
Document Element

Description

Scope impact

Very High

The product does not meet the objectives and is effectively useless

High

The product is deficient in multiple essential requirements

Medium

The product is deficient in one major requirement or multiple minor requirements

Low

The product is deficient in a few minor requirements

Very Low

Minimal deviation from requirements

Very High

Performance is significantly below objectives and is effectively useless

High

Major aspects of performance do not meet requirements

Medium

At least one performance requirement is significantly deficient

Low

There is minor deviation in performance

Very Low

There is minimal deviation in performance

Very High

Greater than 20 percent overall schedule increase

High

Between 10 percent and 20 percent overall schedule increase

Medium

Between 5 percent and 10 percent overall schedule increase

Low

Noncritical paths have used all their float, or overall schedule increase of 1
to 5 percent

Very Low

Slippage on noncritical paths but float remains

Very High

Cost increase of greater than 20 percent

High

Cost increase of 10 to 20 percent

Medium

Cost increase of 5 to 10 percent

Low

Cost increase that requires use of all contingency funds

Very Low

Cost increase that requires use of some contingency but some contingency
funds remain

Very High

The event will most likely occur: 80 percent or greater probability

High

The event will probably occur: 61 to 80 percent probability

Medium

The event is likely to occur: 41 to 60 percent probability

Low

The event may occur: 21 to 40 percent probability

Very Low

The event is unlikely to occur: 1 to 20 percent probability

High

Any event with a probability of medium or above and a very high impact on any
objective
Any event with a probability of high or above and a high impact on any objective
Any event with a probability of very high and a medium impact on any objective
Any event that scores a medium on more than two objectives

Quality impact

Schedule impact

Cost impact

Probability

Risk rating

Planning Forms   139  
Table 2.31 Elements of a Probability Impact Assessment (continued)
Document Element

Description
Medium

Any event with a probability of very low and a high or above impact on any
objective
Any event with a probability of low and a medium or above impact on any
objective
Any event with a probability of medium and a low to high impact on any objective
Any event with a probability of high and a very low to medium impact on any
objective
Any event with a probability of very high and a low or very low impact on any
objective
Any event with a probability of very low and a medium impact on more than two
objectives

Low

Any event with a probability of medium and a very low impact on any objective
Any event with a probability of low and a low or very low impact on any
objective
Any event with a probability of very low and a medium or less impact on any
objective

PROBABILITY AND IMPACT RISK RATING
Project title:

Date Prepared:

Scope impact
Very High
High
Medium
Low
Very Low
quality impact
Very High
High
Medium
Low
Very Low
Schedule impact
Very High
High
Medium
Low
Very Low

Page 1 of 2

PROBABILITY AND IMPACT RISK RATING
cost impact
Very High
High
Medium
Low
Very Low
Probability
Very High
High
Medium
Low
Very Low
risk rating
High
Medium
Low

Page 2 of 2

142   Planning Forms

2.35 Probability and Impact Matrix
The probability and impact matrix is a table that is used to plot each risk after performing a probability
and impact assessment. The probability and impact assessment determines the probability and impact of
the risk. This matrix provides a helpful way to view the various risks on the project and prioritize them for
responses. It may be constructed for threats and opportunities. Information from this matrix will be transferred to the risk register.
This matrix also provides an overview of the amount of risk on the project. The project team can get
an idea of the overall project risk by seeing the number of risks in each square of the matrix. A project with
many risks in the red zone will need more contingency to absorb the risk and likely more time and budget
to develop and implement risk responses.
The probability and impact matrix can receive information from:
• Risk management plan
• Probability and impact risk assessment
• Risk register
It provides information to the risk register.
The probability and impact matrix is a tool used in 11.3 Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis in the
PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. It is updated throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the probability and impact matrix to meet your needs:
• The matrix can be a 3 × 3 for a small project, 5 × 5 for a medium project, and 10 × 10 for a complex
or large project.
• The numbering structure of the probability and impact matrix can be tailored to emphasize the high
risks by creating a nonlinear numbering structure. For example, impact scores can be set up to
double every increment. For example: Very Low = .5, Low = 1, Medium = 2, High = 4, and Very
High = 8.
• The relative importance of the objectives can be weighted. If schedule is most important you may
weight that as 40 percent of the score, whereas scope, quality, and cost all have a weight of 20 percent (make sure the total is 100 percent).
• The combination of probability and impact that indicates a risk is high, medium, or low can be tailored to reflect the organization’s risk appetite. An organization with a low risk appetite may rank
events that fall in the medium or high range for both impact and probability as high risk. An organization with a higher risk threshold may only rank risk with a very high probability and impact as high
risk.

Alignment
The probability and impact assessment and matrix should be aligned and consistent with the following
documents:
• Risk management plan
• Risk register
• Probability and impact assessment
• Stakeholder register

Very Low

Project Title:

Very High

High

Medium

Low

Very Low

Low

Page 1 of 1

Medium

Date Prepared:

High

PROBABILITY AND IMPACT MATRIX

Very High

144   Planning Forms

2.36 Risk Data Sheet
A risk data sheet contains information about a specific identified risk. The information is filled in from the
risk register and updated with more detailed information. Typical information includes:
• Risk identifier
• Risk description
• Status
• Risk cause
• Probability
• Impact on each objective
• Risk score
• Response strategies
• Revised probability
• Revised impact
• Revised score
• Responsible party
• Actions
• Secondary risks
• Residual risks
• Contingency plans
• Schedule or cost contingency
• Fallback plans
• Comments
The risk data sheet can receive information from:
• Risk register
It can be started in process 11.2 Identify Risks from the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. It is continuously updated and elaborated throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the risk data sheet to meet your needs:
• Not all projects require risk data sheets. Where they are used, they are considered an extension of
the risk register.
• You can add or delete any fields you feel necessary.

Alignment
The risk data sheet should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Risk register
• Probability and impact matrix
• Risk report

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.32 to assist you in developing the risk data sheet.

Planning Forms   145  
Table 2.32 Elements of a Risk Data Sheet
Document Element

Description

Risk ID

Enter a unique risk identifier.

Risk description

Provide a detailed description of the risk.

Status

Enter the status as open or closed.

Risk cause

Describe the circumstances or drivers that are the source of the risk.

Probability

Determine the likelihood of the event or condition occurring.

Impact

Describe the impact on one or more of the project objectives.

Score

If you are using numeric scoring, multiply the probability times the impact to determine
the risk score. If you are using relative scoring then combine the two scores (e.g., highlow or medium-high).

Reponses

Describe the planned response strategy to the risk or condition.

Revised probability

Determine the likelihood of the event or condition occurring after the response has been
implemented.

Revised impact

Describe the impact once the response has been implemented.

Revised score

Enter the revised risk score once the response has been implemented.

Responsible party

Identify the person responsible for managing the risk.

Actions

Describe any actions that need to be taken to respond to the risk.

Secondary risks

Describe new risks that arise out of the response strategies taken to address the risk.

Residual risk

Describe the remaining risk after response strategies.

Contingency plan

Develop a plan that will be initiated if specific events occur, such as missing an intermediate milestone. Contingency plans are used when the risk or residual risk is accepted.

Contingency funds

Determine the funds needed to protect the budget from overrun.

Contingency time

Determine the time needed to protect the schedule from overrun.

Fallback plans

Devise a plan to use if other response strategies fail.

Comments

Provide any comments or additional helpful information about the risk event or condition.

Scope

comments:

Fallback Plans:

contingency Plan:

residual risk:

Secondary risks:

revised
Probability

Scope

Schedule

impact

quality

Schedule

revised impact

quality

risk cause:

Status:

Probability

risk Description:

risk iD:

Project title:

Page 1 of 1

cost

cost

responsible
Party

contingency time:

contingency Funds:

revised
Score

Score

Date Prepared:

RISK DATA SHEET

actions

responses

Planning Forms   147  

2.37 Procurement Management Plan
The procurement management plan is a component of the project management plan that describes the
activities undertaken during the procurement process. It describes how all aspects of a procurement will
be managed. Typical information includes:
• How procured work will be coordinated and integrated with other project work. Of specific interest is:
○○ Scope
○○ Schedule
○○ Documentation
○○ Risk
• Timing of procurement activities
• Contract performance metrics
• Procurement roles, responsibility, and authority
• Procurement constraints and assumptions
• Legal jurisdiction and currency
• Information on use of independent estimates
• Risk management concerns, such as need for bonds or insurance
• Prequalified sellers lists
The procurement management plan can receive information from:
• Project charter
• Stakeholder register
• Scope management plan
• Requirements documentation
• Requirements traceability matrix
• Scope baseline
• Milestone list
• Project schedule
• Quality management plan
• Resource management plan
• Resource requirements
• Risk register
• Project team assignments
It provides information to:
• Risk register
• Stakeholder register
The procurement management plan is an output from process 12.1 Plan Procurement Management in
the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. It is developed once and does not usually change.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the procurement management plan to meet your needs:
• For a project that will be done using internal resources only, you do not need a procurement management plan.

148   Planning Forms
• For a project where materials will be purchased and there is a standing purchase order with a vendor,
you will not need a procurement management plan.
• For projects with a few procurements consider combining this form with the procurement strategy.
• You may wish to combine the assumptions and constraints for procurements with the assumption
log.
• Work with the contracting or legal department to ensure compliance with organizational purchasing
policies.

Alignment
The procurement management plan should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Scope management plan
• Requirements management plan
• Scope baseline
• Schedule management plan
• Project schedule
• Cost management plan
• Cost estimates
• Project budget
• Procurement strategy

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.33 to assist you in developing the procurement management plan.

Planning Forms   149  
Table 2.33 Elements of a Procurement Management Plan
Document Element

Description

Procurement integration

Scope

Define how the contractor's WBS will integrate with the
project WBS.

Schedule

Define how the contractor's schedule will integrate with
the project schedule, including milestones and long lead
items.

Documentation

Describe how contractor documentation will integrate
with project documentation.

Risk

Describe how risk identification, analysis, and response
will integrate with risk management for the overall project.

Reporting

Define how the contractor's status reports will integrate
with the project status report.

Timing

Identify the timetable of key procurement activities. Examples include when
the statement of work (SOW) will be complete, when procurement documents will be released, the date proposals are due, and so forth.

Performance metrics

Document the metrics that will be used to evaluate the seller's performance.

Roles, responsibilities, and authority

Define the roles, responsibilities, and authority level of the project manager,
contractor, and procurement department, as well as any other significant
stakeholders for the contract.

Assumptions and constraints

Record assumptions and constraints related to the procurement activities.

Legal jurisdiction and currency

Identify the location that has legal jurisdiction. Identify the currency that will
be used for pricing and payment.

Independent estimates

Document whether independent cost estimates will be used and if they will
be needed for source selection.

Risk management

Document requirements for performance bonds or insurance contracts to
reduce risk.

Prequalified sellers

List any prequalified sellers that will be used.

PROCUREMENT MANAGEMENT PLAN
Project title:

Date:

Procurement integration
area

integration approach

Scope
Schedule
Documentation
Risk
Reporting
timing of key Procurement activities
Date

activity

Performance Metrics

item

Metric

Measurement Method

Page 1 of 2

PROCUREMENT MANAGEMENT PLAN
roles, responsibility, and authority
role

responsibility

authority

assumptions and constraints
category

assumption/constraint

legal jurisdiction and currency

independent estimates

risk Management

Prequalified Sellers
1.
2.
3.
4.
Page 2 of 2

152   Planning Forms

2.38 Procurement Strategy
The procurement strategy is a project document that describes information about specific procurements.
Typical information includes:
• Delivery methods
• Contract types
• Procurement phases
The procurement strategy can receive information from:
• Project charter
• Stakeholder register
• Project roadmap
• Requirements documentation
• Requirements traceability matrix
• Scope baseline
• Milestone list
• Project schedule
• Resource management plan
• Resource requirements
It provides information to:
• Project schedule
• Project budget
• Quality management plan
• Risk register
The procurement strategy is an output from process 12.1 Plan Procurement Management in the
PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. It is developed once for each procurement when needed.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the procurement strategy to meet your needs:
• For a project that will be done using internal resources only, you do not need a procurement strategy.
• For projects with few procurements consider combining this form with the procurement management plan.
• For simple purchases, or for purchases where you have worked with a vendor successfully for a
length of time, you may not need a formal procurement strategy; rather you would record the information in a statement of work (SOW) that would be part of the contract.
• Work with the contracting or legal department to ensure compliance with organizational purchasing
policies.

Alignment
The procurement strategy should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project charter
• Project roadmap

Planning Forms   153  
• Requirements documentation
• Requirements traceability matrix
• Schedule management plan
• Cost management plan
• Resource management plan
• Procurement management plan

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.34 to assist you in developing the procurement strategy.
Table 2.34 Elements of a Procurement Strategy
Document Element

Description

Delivery methods

Professional services

Describe how the contractor will work with the buyer; for example,
in a joint venture, as a representative, with or without subcontracting allowed.

Construction services

Describe the limitations of delivery, such as design build, design
bid build, etc.

Contract types

Describe the contract type, fixed, incentive, or award fees. Include the criteria associated
with the fees. Common contract types include:
Fixed Price:
FFP – Firm Fixed Price
FPIF – Fixed Price with Incentive Fee
FP-EPA – Fixed Price with Economic Price Adjustment
Cost Reimbursable:
CPFF – Cost Plus Fixed Fee
CPIF – Cost Plus Incentive Fee
CPAF – Cost Plus Award Fee
Time and Materials (T&M)

Procurement phases

List the procurement phases, milestones, criteria to advance to the next phase, and tests or
evaluations for each phase. Include any knowledge transfer requirements.

□ FPIF

Phase

entry criteria

Procurement life cycle

incentive or award Fee

□ FFP

contract type

Delivery Method

Project title:

criteria

□ CPFF

□ CPIF

Page 1 of 1

key Deliverables or Milestones

□ FP-EPA

Date:

exit criteria

□ CPAF

PROCUREMENT STRATEGY

□ T&M

knowledge transfer

□ Other

Planning Forms   155  

2.39 Source Selection Criteria
Source selection criteria is a set of attributes desired by the buyer that a seller must meet or exceed to be
selected for a contract. The source selection criteria form is an aid in determining and rating the criteria
that will be used to evaluate bid proposals. This is a multistep process.
1. The criteria to evaluate bid responses are determined.
2. A weight is assigned to each criterion. The sum of all the criteria must equal 100 percent.
3. The range of ratings for each criterion is determined, such as 1–5 or 1–10.
4. The performance necessary for each rating is defined.
5. Each proposal is evaluated against the criteria and is rated accordingly.
6. The weight is multiplied by the rate and a score for each criterion is derived.
7. The scores are totaled and the highest total score is the winner of the bid.
Evaluation criteria commonly include such items as:
• Capability and capacity
• Product cost and life cycle cost
• Delivery dates
• Technical expertise
• Prior experience
• Proposed approach and work plan
• Key staff qualifications, availability, and competence
• Financial stability
• Management experience
• Training and knowledge transfer
The source selection criteria is an output from process 12.1 Plan Procurement Management in the
PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. Source selection criteria is established for each major procurement.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the source selection criteria to meet your needs:
• For a small procurement that is not complex, you likely won't need to develop a weighted source
selection criteria form.
• For international procurements you may also want to include familiarity with local laws and regulations,
as well as experience and relationships in the locations involved.
• For construction projects, or projects with many logistical concerns, you could include logistics handling as a selection criteria.

Alignment
The source selection criteria should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Requirements documentation
• Scope baseline
• Project schedule
• Resource management plan

156   Planning Forms
• Resource requirements
• Procurement management plan
• Procurement strategy

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.35 to assist you in developing the source selection criteria.
Table 2.35 Elements of Source Selection Criteria
Document Element

Description

Criteria

1

Describe what a 1 means for the criteria. For example, for experience, it may mean that
the bidder has no prior experience.

2

Describe what a 2 means for the criteria. For example, for experience, it may mean that
the bidder has done 1 similar job.

3

Describe what a 3 means for the criteria. For example, for experience, it may mean that
the bidder has done 3 to 5 similar jobs.

4

Describe what a 4 means for the criteria. For example, for experience, it may mean that
the bidder has done 5 to 10 similar jobs.

5

Describe what a 5 means for the criteria. For example, for experience, it may mean that
the job is the bidder’s core competency.

Weight

Enter the weight for each criterion. Total weight for all criteria must equal 100 percent.

Candidate rating

Enter the rating per the criteria above.

Candidate score

Multiply the weight times the rating.

Total

Sum the scores for each candidate.

totals

criterion 5

criterion 4

criterion 3

criterion 2

criterion 1

criterion 5

criterion 4

criterion 3

criterion 2

criterion 1

Project title:

Weight

1

candidate 1
rating

3

candidate 2
rating

Page 1 of 1

candidate 1
Score

2

Date Prepared:

candidate 2
Score

SOURCE SELECTION CRITERIA
4

candidate 3
rating

candidate 3
Score

5

158   Planning Forms

2.40 Stakeholder Engagement Plan
The stakeholder engagement plan is a component of the project management plan. It describes the strategies and actions that will be used to promote productive involvement of stakeholders in decision making
and project execution. Typical information includes:
• Desired and current engagement level of key stakeholders
• Scope and impact of change to stakeholders
• Interrelationships and potential overlap between stakeholders
• Engagement approach for each stakeholder or group of stakeholders
In addition, the stakeholder engagement plan can include methods for updating and refining the plan
throughout the project.
The stakeholder engagement plan can receive information from:
• Project charter
• Assumption log
• Change log
• Issue log
• Stakeholder register
• Resource management plan
• Project schedule
• Communications management plan
• Risk management plan
• Risk register
It provides information to:
• Requirements documentation
• Quality management plan
• Communications management plan
• Stakeholder register
The stakeholder engagement plan is an output from process 13.2 Plan Stakeholder Engagement in the
PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. It is updated periodically throughout the project as needed.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the stakeholder engagement plan to meet your needs:
• For small projects you may not need a stakeholder engagement plan. You can combine the information with the stakeholder register as appropriate.
• Projects with multiple stakeholders with overlapping and intersecting relationships can benefit from
having a stakeholder relationship map that shows the connections.
• For many high-risk projects, stakeholder engagement is critical to success. For projects with many
stakeholders, complex interactions, and high-risk stakeholders you will need to have a robust stakeholder engagement plan.

Planning Forms   159  
Alignment
The stakeholder engagement plan should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Stakeholder register
• Communications management plan
• Project schedule

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 2.36 to assist you in developing the stakeholder engagement plan.
Table 2.36 Elements of a Stakeholder Engagement Plan
Document Element

Description

Stakeholder engagement assessment matrix

Use information from the stakeholder register to document stakeholders. Document “current” stakeholder engagement level with a
“C” and “desired” stakeholder engagement with a “D.” A common
format includes the following stakeholder participation descriptions:
Unaware. Unaware of project and its potential impacts
Resistant. Aware of project and potential impacts and resistant to
the change
Neutral. Aware of project yet neither supportive nor resistant
Supportive. Aware of project and potential impacts and supportive
of change
Leading. Aware of project and potential impacts and actively
engaged in ensuring project success

Stakeholder changes

Describe any pending additions, deletions, or changes to stakeholders and the potential impact to the project.

Interrelationships

List any relationships between and among stakeholder groups.

Stakeholder engagement approach

Describe the approach you will use with each stakeholder to move
them to the preferred level of engagement.

unaware

Stakeholder relationships

Pending Stakeholder changes

C = Current level of engagement

Stakeholder

Project title:
neutral

Page 1 of 2

D = Desired level of engagement

resistant

Date Prepared:
Supportive

STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN
leading

Stakeholder

Stakeholder engagement approach
approach

Page 2 of 2

STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN

Executing Forms

3

3.0 EXEcuTIng PRocEss gRouP
The purpose of the Executing Process Group is to carry out the work necessary to meet the project objectives. There are ten processes in the Executing Process Group.
• Direct and Manage Project Work
• Manage Project Knowledge
• Manage Quality
• Acquire Resources
• Develop Project Team
• Manage Project Team
• Manage Communications
• Implement Risk Responses
• Conduct Procurements
• Manage Stakeholder Engagement
The intent of the Executing Process Group is to at least:
• Create the deliverables
• Manage the project knowledge including lessons learned
• Manage project quality
• Acquire team and physical resources
• Manage the project team
• Carry out project communications
• Implement risk responses
• Report project progress
• Bid and award contracts
• Manage stakeholder engagement with the project
In these processes, the main work of the project is carried out and the majority of the funds are
expended. To be effective, the project manager must make decisions, identify issues, coordinate project
resources, report progress, and engage with stakeholders, while completing the project deliverables.

164   Executing Forms
The forms used to document project execution include:
• Issue log
• Decision log
• Change request
• Change log
• Lessons learned register
• Quality audit*
• Form test and evaluation documents
• Team performance assessment

*Test and evaluation documents, metrics, and measurements are product specific. There is no template that can provide an
accurate depiction. They can include customized checklists, requirements traceability matrixes, performance requirements,
and other product-specific information.

Executing Forms   165  

3.1 Issue Log
The issue log is a project document used to record and monitor issues. An issue is defined as a current
condition or situation that could have an impact on the project objectives. Examples of issues are points
or matters in question that are in dispute or under discussion, or over which there are opposing views or
disagreements. Issues can also arise from a risk event that has occurred and must now be dealt with. An
issue log includes:
• Identifier
• Type
• Issue description
• Priority
• Impact on objectives
• Responsible party
• Status
• Resolution date
• Final resolution
• Comments
The issue log is an output from process 4.3 Direct and Manage Project Work in the PMBOK® Guide –
Sixth Edition. It is a dynamic document that is created at the start of the project and is maintained throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the issue log to meet your needs:
• You may want to add information on the source of the issue.
• You could add a field that documents which stakeholders are impacted by the issue or should be
involved with resolving the issue.

Alignment
The issue log should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Risk register
• Decision log
• Lessons learned register

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 3.1 to assist you in developing the issue log.

166   Executing Forms
Table 3.1 Elements of an Issue Log
Document Element

Description

ID

Enter a unique issue identifier.

Type

Document the type or category of the issue, such as stakeholder issue, technical issue,
conflict, etc.

Issue description

Provide a detailed description of the issue.

Priority

Define the priority, such as urgent, high, medium, or low.

Impact on objectives

Identify the project objectives that the issue impacts and the degree of impact.

Responsible party

Identify the person who is assigned to resolve the issue.

Status

Denote the status of the issue as open or closed.

Resolution date

Document the date by which the issue needs to be resolved.

Final resolution

Describe how the issue was resolved.

Comments

Document any clarifying comments about the issue, resolution, or other fields on the form.

ISSUE LOG
Project Title:

Issue ID

Date Prepared:

Type

Responsible Party

Issue Description

status

Res. Date

Priority

Impact on objectives

Final Resolution

comments

Page 1 of 1

168   Executing Forms

3.2 Decision Log
Frequently there are alternatives in developing a product or managing a project. Using a decision log can
help keep track of the decisions that were made, who made them, and when they were made. A decision
log can include:
• Identifier
• Category
• Decision
• Responsible party
• Date
• Comments
The decision log is not listed explicitly in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition; however, it can be very
helpful in managing the day-to-day activities of the project. It is a dynamic document that is created at the
start of the project and is maintained throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the decision log to meet your needs:
• For projects that are large, complicated, or complex you can add fields to identify the impacts of the
decision on deliverables or project objectives.
• You could add a field that documents which stakeholders are impacted by the decision or should be
involved with making the decision or should be informed of the decision.

Alignment
The decision log should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project scope statement
• Responsibility assignment matrix
• Communications management plan
• Issue register

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 3.2 to assist you in developing the decision log.
Table 3.2 Elements of a Decision Log
Document Element

Description

ID

Enter a unique decision identifier.

Category

Document the type of decision, such as technical, project, process, etc.

Decision

Provide a detailed description of the decision.

Responsible party

Identify the person authorized to make the decision.

Priority

Enter the date the decision was made and authorized.

Comments

Enter any further information to clarify the decision, alternatives considered, the reason the
decision was made, and the impact of the decision.

DECISION LOG
Project Title:

ID

category

Date Prepared:

Decision

Responsible Party

Page 1 of 1

Date

comments

170   Executing Forms

3.3 Change Request
A change request is used to change any aspect of the project. It can pertain to product, documents,
cost, schedule, or any other aspect of the project. Typical information includes:
• Requestor
• Category
• Description of the proposed change
• Justification
• Impacts of the proposed change
○○ Scope
○○ Quality
○○ Requirements
○○ Cost
○○ Schedule
○○ Project documents
• Comments
A change request can come from almost any process involved in executing, monitoring, and controlling
the project. It is described in 4.3 Direct and Manage Project Work in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition.
Upon completion, it is submitted to the change control board for review.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the change request to meet your needs:
• For smaller projects you can simplify the form by having a summary description of the impacts without including impacts for each subcategory (scope, quality, requirements, etc.).
• You can add a check box that indicates whether the change is mandatory (such as a legal requirement) or discretionary.
• A field can be added that describes the implications of not making the change.

Alignment
The change request should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Change management plan
• Change log

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 3.3 to assist you in developing the change request.

Executing Forms   171  
Table 3.3 Elements of a Change Request
Document Element

Description

Requestor

The name, and if appropriate, the position of the person requesting the change

Category

Check a box to indicate the category of change.

Description of change

Describe the proposed change in enough detail to clearly communicate all
aspects of the change.

Justification for proposed change

Indicate the reason for the change.

Impacts of change

Scope

Describe the impact of the proposed change on the project
and product scope.

Quality

Describe the impact of the proposed change on the project
or product quality.

Requirements

Describe the impact of the proposed change on the project
or product requirements.

Cost

Describe the impact of the proposed change on the project
budget, cost estimates, or funding requirements.

Schedule

Describe the impact of the proposed change on the schedule and whether it will change the critical path.

Project
documents

Describe the impact of the proposed change on each project document.

Comments

Provide any comments that will clarify information about the requested change.

CHANGE REQUEST
Project Title:

Date Prepared:

Requestor:
category:
□ Scope

□ Quality

□ Requirements

□ Cost

□ Schedule

□ Documents

Detailed Description of Proposed change

Justification for Proposed change

Impacts of change
scope

□ Increase

□ Decrease

□ Modify

□ Increase

□ Decrease

□ Modify

Description:

quality
Description:

Page 1 of 3

CHANGE REQUEST
Requirements

□ Increase

□ Decrease

□ Modify

□ Increase

□ Decrease

□ Modify

□ Increase

□ Decrease

□ Modify

□ High risk

□ Low risk

□ Medium risk

Description:

cost
Description:

schedule
Description:

stakeholder Impact
Description:

Project Documents

comments

Page 2 of 3

CHANGE REQUEST
Disposition:

□ Approve

□ Defer

Justification

Page 3 of 3

□ Reject

Executing Forms   175  

3.4 Change Log
The change log is used to track changes from the change request through the final decision. Typical
information includes:
• Identifier
• Category
• Description
• Requestor
• Submission date
• Status
• Disposition
The change log is related to the:
• Change request
• Change management plan
The change log is used in 4.6 Perform Integrated Change Control in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition.
It is a dynamic document that is updated throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the change log to meet your needs:
• You can include additional summary information from the change request in the log, such as cost or
schedule impact.
• You can add a check box that indicates whether the change is mandatory (such as a legal requirement) or discretionary.
• The change log can also record information to track configuration management, such as which configurable items are impacted.
• Some IT projects include a field that indicates if a change is a bug fix.

Alignment
The change log should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Change management plan
• Change request

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 3.4 to assist you in developing the change log.

176   Executing Forms
Table 3.4 Elements of a Change Log
Document Element

Description

Identifier

Enter a unique change identifier.

Category

Enter the category from the change request form.

Description

Describe the proposed change.

Requestor

Enter the name of the person requesting the change.

Submission date

Enter the date the change was submitted.

Status

Enter the status as open, pending, closed.

Disposition

Enter the outcome of the change request as approved, deferred, or rejected.

ID

Project Title:

category

Description of change

Page 1 of 1

Requestor

Date Prepared:

CHANGE LOG
submission Date

status

Disposition

178   Executing Forms

3.5 Lessons Learned Register
The lessons learned register is used to record challenges, problems, good practices, and other information that can be passed along to the organization and to other projects to avoid repeating mistakes and to
improve organizational and project processes and procedures. Lessons learned can be project oriented
or product oriented. They can include information on risks, issues, procurements, quality defects, and any
areas of poor or outstanding performance. A lessons learned register includes:
• Identifier
• Category
• Trigger
• Lesson
• Responsible party
• Comments
The lessons learned register is an output from process 4.4 Manage Project Knowledge in the PMBOK®
Guide – Sixth Edition. It is a dynamic document that is updated throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the lessons learned register to meet your needs:
• You can add information on the person identifying the lesson, especially if the person identifying the
lesson and the person accountable for implementing it are different.
• Information on the next implementation opportunity and the expected implementation date can be
used to ensure that the information isn’t just recorded, but it is acted on as well.
• You can add a checkbox to indicate whether the lesson impacts an organizational system, policy or
practice, or whether it can be implemented without the need to escalate up through the organization.

Alignment
The lessons learned register should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Change management plan
• Change log
• Issue log
• Decision log
• Lessons learned summary

Description
You can use the element descriptions in the Table 3.5 to assist you in developing the lessons learned
register.

Executing Forms   179  
TABLE 3.5 Elements of a Lessons Learned Register
Document Element

Description

ID

Enter a unique lesson identifier.

Category

Document the category of lesson, such as process, technical, environmental, stakeholder,
phase, etc.

Trigger

Describe the context, event, or condition that led to the challenge, problem, or beneficial
outcome.

Lesson

Articulate the lesson that can be passed on to other projects and to the organization.

Responsible party

Identify the person who is assigned to implement any changes to ensure the lesson is
communicated and distributed.

Comments

Document any clarifying comments about the challenge, problem, good practice, or other
fields on the form.

ID

category

Project Title:
Trigger

Page 1 of 1

Lesson

Responsible Party

Date Prepared:

LESSONS LEARNED REGISTER
comments

Executing Forms   181  

3.6 Quality Audit
A quality audit is a technique that employs a structured, independent review to project and/or product elements. Any aspect of the project or product can be audited. Common areas for audit include:
• Project processes
• Project documents
• Product requirements
• Product documentation
• Defect or deficiency repair
• Compliance with organizational policies and procedures
• Compliance with the quality management plan
• Good practices from similar projects
• Areas for improvement
• Description of deficiencies or defects
Defects or deficiencies should include action items, a responsible party, and be assigned a due date
for compliance.
A quality audit is a technique from process 8.2 Manage Quality in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition.
Audits should be tailored to best meet the needs of the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the quality audit to meet your needs:
• Quality audits can also include information that will be shared with other projects.
• Some projects use audits to track the implementation of approved changes and corrective or preventive actions.

Alignment
The quality audit should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Quality management plan

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 3.6 to assist you in developing the quality audit.

182   Executing Forms
Table 3.6 Elements of a Quality Audit
Document Element

Description

Area audited

Check the box for the area or areas audited.

Good practices from similar projects

Describe any good or best practices that can be shared from similar
projects.

Areas for improvement

Describe any areas that need improvement and the specific improvements or measurements that need to be achieved.

Deficiencies or defects

ID

Enter a unique defect identifier.

Defect

Describe the deficiency or defect.

Action

Describe the corrective actions needed to fix the
defect.

Responsible party

Identify the person assigned to correct the deficiency or defect.

Due date

Document the due date.

Comments

Provide any additional useful comments about the audit.

QUALITY AUDIT
Project Title:

Date Prepared:

Project Auditor:

Audit Date:

Area Audited:
□ Project processes

□ Project documents

□ Product documents

□ Product documentation

□ Quality management plan

□ Defect/deficiency repair

□ Organizational policies and procedures
good Practices from similar Projects:

Areas for Improvement:

Deficiencies or Defects:
ID

Defect

Action

comments:

Page 1 of 1

Responsible Party

Due Date

184   Executing Forms

3.7 Team Performance Assessment
The team performance assessment is used to review technical and interpersonal competencies of the
team as a whole, as well as general characteristics such as team morale and cohesiveness. It is used
by the project manager to identify areas to improve the team’s ability to achieve agreed-upon project
objectives. The contents of the team performance assessment can include:
• Technical performance
○○ Scope
○○ Quality
○○ Schedule
○○ Cost
• Interpersonal competency
○○ Communication
○○ Collaboration
○○ Conflict management
○○ Decision making
• Team characteristics
○○ Morale
○○ Cohesiveness
The team performance assessment is an output of process 9.4 Develop Team in the PMBOK®
Guide – Sixth Edition.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the team performance assessment to meet your needs:
• For a small project you can just do a summary of technical performance and interpersonal competency rather than decomposing those categories into subcategories.
• If part of your role as a project manager is to evaluate individual team member performance you can
modify the form to focus on individuals rather than the team.
• Some team assessments include team strengths and weaknesses.

Alignment
The team performance assessment should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Resource management plan

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 3.7 to assist you in developing the team performance
assessment.

Executing Forms   185  
Table 3.7 Elements of a Team Performance Assessment
Document Element

Description

Technical performance

Scope

Rate the team’s ability to deliver the scope of the project
and product. Provide comments that describe instances
or aspects of scope performance that justify the rating.

Quality

Rate the team’s ability to deliver the quality required of
the project and product. Provide comments that describe
instances or aspects of quality performance that justify the
rating.

Schedule

Rate the team’s ability to deliver on schedule. Provide
comments that describe instances or aspects of schedule
performance that justify the rating.

Cost

Rate the team’s ability to deliver within budget. Provide
comments that describe instances or aspects of cost performance that justify the rating.

Communication

Rate the team’s ability to communicate effectively. Provide
comments that illustrate instances of communication that
justify the rating.

Collaboration

Rate the team’s ability to collaborate effectively. Provide
comments that illustrate instances of collaboration that
justify the rating.

Conflict management

Rate the team’s ability to manage conflict effectively.
Provide comments that illustrate instances of conflict management that justify the rating.

Decision making

Rate the team’s ability to make decisions effectively.
Provide comments that illustrate instances of decision
making that justify the rating.

Interpersonal competency

Team morale

Describe the overall team morale.

Areas for development

Area

List technical or interpersonal areas for development.

Approach

Describe the development approach, such as training,
mentoring, or coaching.

Actions

List the actions necessary to implement the development
approach.

TEAM PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT
Project Title:

Date Prepared:

Technical Performance
scope

□ Exceeds Expectations

□ Meets Expectations

□ Needs Improvement

□ Exceeds Expectations

□ Meets Expectations

□ Needs Improvement

□ Exceeds Expectations

□ Meets Expectations

□ Needs Improvement

□ Exceeds Expectations

□ Meets Expectations

□ Needs Improvement

Comments:

quality
Comments:

schedule
Comments:

cost
Comments:

Page 1 of 3

TEAM PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT
Interpersonal competency
communication

□ Exceeds Expectations

□ Meets Expectations

□ Needs Improvement

□ Exceeds Expectations

□ Meets Expectations

□ Needs Improvement

□ Exceeds Expectations

□ Meets Expectations

□ Needs Improvement

□ Exceeds Expectations

□ Meets Expectations

□ Needs Improvement

Comments:

collaboration
Comments:

conflict management
Comments:

Decision making
Comments:

Page 2 of 3

TEAM PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT
Team morale

□ Exceeds Expectations

□ Meets Expectations

□ Needs Improvement

comments:

Areas for Development
Area

Approach

Actions

Page 3 of 3

Monitoring and
Controlling Forms

4

4.0 MoniTorinG anD ConTroLLinG proCeSS Group
The purpose of the Monitoring and Controlling Process Group is to review project work results and compare them to planned results. A significant variance indicates the need for preventive actions, corrective
actions, or change requests. There are 11 processes in the Monitoring and Controlling Process Group:
• Monitor and Control Project Work
• Perform Integrated Change Control
• Validate Scope
• Control Scope
• Control Schedule
• Control Costs
• Control Quality
• Control Resources
• Monitor Communications
• Monitor Risks
• Control Procurements
• Monitor Stakeholder Engagement
The intent of the Monitoring and Controlling Process Group is to at least:
• Review and analyze project performance
• Recommend changes and corrective and preventive actions
• Process change requests
• Report project performance
• Monitor risk activities, responses, and status
• Manage contractors
• Monitor the effectiveness of stakeholder engagement
Monitoring and controlling takes place throughout the project, from inception to closing. All variances
are identified, and all change requests are processed here. The product deliverables are also accepted in
the monitoring and controlling processes.

190    Monitoring and Controlling Forms
The forms used to document these activities include:
• Team member status report
• Project status report
• Variance analysis
• Earned value analysis
• Risk audit
• Contractor status report
• Procurement audit
• Contract closeout
• Product acceptance

Monitoring and Controlling Forms   191  

4.1 Team Member Status Report
The team member status report is filled out by team members and submitted to the project manager on
a regular basis. It tracks schedule, quality, and cost status for the current reporting period and provides
planned information for the next reporting period. Status reports also identify new risks and issues that have
arisen in the current reporting period. Typical information includes:
• Activities planned for the current reporting period
• Activities accomplished in the current reporting period
• Activities planned but not accomplished in the current reporting period
• Root causes of activities variances
• Funds spent in the current reporting period
• Funds planned to be spent for the current reporting period
• Root causes of funds variances
• Quality variances identified in the current reporting period
• Planned corrective or preventive action
• Activities planned for the next reporting period
• Costs planned for the next reporting period
• New risks identified
• New issues identified
• Comments
This information is generally compiled by the project manager into a project status report. The team
member status report and the project status report are examples of work performance reports, as mentioned in 4.5 Monitor and Control Project Work in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. This report is submitted at predefined intervals throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the team member status report to meet your needs:
• You can add a field for escalations to identify those areas that need to be escalated to the sponsor,
program manager, or other appropriate individual.
• Some reports include a field to record decisions made. These would be transferred to the project
decision log.
• If your organization has a robust knowledge management process you might consider adding fields
for knowledge transfer or lessons learned. These can then be transferred to the organization’s knowledge repository or lessons learned register.

Alignment
The team member status report should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project schedule
• Cost estimates
• Project budget
• Issue log
• Risk register
• Project status report
• Variance analysis
• Earned value status report

192    Monitoring and Controlling Forms
Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 4.1 to assist you in developing the team member status
report.
TABLE 4.1 Elements of a Team Member Status Report
Document Element

Description

Activities planned this reporting period

List all activities scheduled for this period, including work to
be started, continued, or completed.

Activities accomplished this reporting period

List all activities accomplished this period, including work
that was started, continued, or completed.

Activities planned but not accomplished this
reporting period

List all activities that were scheduled for this period, but not
started, continued, or completed.

Root cause of variances

For any work that was not accomplished as scheduled,
identify the cause of the variance.

Funds spent this reporting period

Record funds spent this period.

Funds planned to be spent this reporting period

Record funds that were planned to be spent this period.

Root cause of variances

For any expenditures that were over or under plan, identify
the cause of the variance. Include information on labor vs.
material variances. Identify if the basis of estimates or the
assumptions were inaccurate.

Quality variances identified this period

Identify any product performance or quality variance.

Planned corrective of preventive action

Identify any actions needed to recover cost, schedule, or
quality variances or prevent future variances.

Activities planned for next reporting period

List all activities scheduled for next period, including work
to be started, continued, or completed.

Costs planned for next reporting period

Identify funds planned to be expended next period.

New risks identified

Identify any new risks that have arisen. New risks should
be recorded in the risk register as well.

Issues

Identify any new issues that have arisen. New issues
should be recorded in the issue log as well.

Comments

Document any comments that add relevance to this report.

TEAM MEMBER STATUS REPORT
project Title:

Date prepared:

Team Member:

role:

activities planned for This reporting period
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

activities accomplished This reporting period
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

activities planned but not accomplished This reporting period
1.
2.
3.
4.

page 1 of 3

TEAM MEMBER STATUS REPORT
root Cause of activity Variances

Funds Spent This reporting period

Funds planned to be Spent This reporting period

root Cause of Cost Variances

Quality Variances identified This period

planned Corrective or preventive action

page 2 of 3

TEAM MEMBER STATUS REPORT
activities planned for next reporting period
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Costs planned for next reporting period

new risks identified
risk

new issues identified
issue

Comments

page 3 of 3

196    Monitoring and Controlling Forms

4.2 Project Status Report
The project status report (sometimes known as a performance report or progress report) is filled out by the
project manager and submitted on a regular basis to the sponsor, project portfolio management group,
project management office (PMO), or other project oversight person or group. The information is compiled
from the team member status reports and includes overall project performance. It contains summary-level
information, such as accomplishments, rather than detailed activity-level information. The project status
report tracks schedule and cost status for the current reporting period and provides planned information
for the next reporting period. It indicates impacts to milestones and cost reserves as well as identifying
new risks and issues that have arisen in the current reporting period. Typical information includes:
• Accomplishments for the current reporting period
• Accomplishments planned but not completed in the current reporting period
• Root causes of accomplishment variances
• Impact to upcoming milestones or project due date
• Planned corrective or preventive action
• Funds spent in the current reporting period
• Root causes of budget variances
• Impact to overall budget or contingency funds
• Planned corrective or preventive action
• Accomplishments planned for the next reporting period
• Costs planned for the next reporting period
• New risks identified
• Issues
• Comments
The project status report is an example of a work performance report, an output of 4.5 Monitor and
Control Project Work in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. This report is submitted at predefined intervals
throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the project status report to meet your needs:
• You can add a field for escalations to identify those areas that need to be escalated to the sponsor,
program manager, or other appropriate individuals.
• Some reports include a field to record decisions made. These would be transferred to the project
decision log.
• If there were any change requests that were submitted during the reporting period you may want to
summarize them and refer the reader to the change log.
• If your organization has a robust knowledge management process you might consider adding fields
for knowledge transfer or lessons learned. These can then be transferred to the organization’s knowledge repository or lessons learned register.
• In addition to tailoring the content of the project status report, you can tailor the presentation. Many
PMOs have reporting software that transforms the data into dashboards, heat reports, stop light
charts, or other representations.

Alignment
The project status report should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Team member status reports
• Project schedule

Monitoring and Controlling Forms   197  
• Cost estimates
• Project budget
• Issue log
• Risk register
• Variance analysis
• Earned value status report
• Contractor status report

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 4.2 to assist you in developing the project status report.
Table 4.2 Elements of a Project Status Report
Document Element

Description

Accomplishments for this reporting
period

List all work packages or other accomplishments scheduled for completion for the current reporting period.

Accomplishments planned but not
completed this reporting period

List all work packages or other accomplishments scheduled for the current period but not completed.

Root cause of variances

Identify the cause of the variance for any work that was not accomplished
as scheduled for the current period.

Impact to upcoming milestones or
project due date

Identify any impact to any upcoming milestones or overall project schedule
for any work that was not accomplished as scheduled. Identify any work
currently behind on the critical path or if the critical path has changed
based on the variance.

Planned corrective or preventive
action

Identify any actions needed to make up schedule variances or prevent
future schedule variances.

Funds spent this reporting period

Record funds spent this period.

Root cause of variance

Identify the cause of the variance for any expenditure over or under
plan. Include information on the labor variance versus material variance
and whether the variance is due to the basis of estimates or estimating
assumptions.

Impact to overall budget or contingency funds

Indicate the impact to the overall project budget or whether contingency
funds must be expended.

Planned corrective or preventive
action

Identify any actions needed to recover cost variances or to prevent future
schedule variances.

Accomplishments planned for next
reporting period

List all work packages or accomplishments scheduled for completion next
period.

Costs planned for next reporting
period

Identify funds planned to be expended next period.

New risks identified

Identify any new risks that have been identified this period. These risks
should be recorded in the risk register as well.

Issues

Identify any new issues that have arisen this period. These issues should
be recorded in the issue log as well.

Comments

Record any comments that add relevance to the report.

PROJECT STATUS REPORT
project Title:

Date prepared:

project Manager:

Sponsor:

accomplishments for This reporting period
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

accomplishments planned but not Completed This reporting period
1.
2.
3.
4.

root Cause of Variances

page 1 of 4

PROJECT STATUS REPORT
impact to upcoming Milestones or project Due Date

planned Corrective or preventive action

Funds Spent This reporting period

root Cause of Variances

page 2 of 4

PROJECT STATUS REPORT
impact to overall budget or Contingency Funds

planned Corrective or preventive action

accomplishments planned for next reporting period
1.
2.
3.
4.

Costs planned for next reporting period

page 3 of 4

PROJECT STATUS REPORT
new risks identified
risk:

issues
issue:

Comments

page 4 of 4

202    Monitoring and Controlling Forms

4.3 Variance Analysis
Variance analysis reports collect and assemble information on project performance variances. Common
topics are schedule, cost, and quality variances. Information on a variance analysis includes:
• Schedule variance
○○ Planned results
○○ Actual results
○○ Variance
○○ Root cause
○○ Planned response
• Cost variance
○○ Planned results
○○ Actual results
○○ Variance
○○ Root cause
○○ Planned response
• Quality variance
○○ Planned results
○○ Actual results
○○ Variance
○○ Root cause
• Planned response
Variance analysis is an example of a data analysis technique in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. The
information can be provided as a standalone report, as part of the project status report, or as backup to an
earned value status report. It is identified as a technique in these processes:
• 4.5 Monitor and Control Project Work
• 4.7 Close Project or Phase
• 5.6 Control Scope
• 6.6 Control Schedule
• 7.4 Control Costs

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the variance analysis to meet your needs:
• Scope variance can be included but is generally indicated by a schedule variance, as either more or
less scope will have been accomplished over time.
• The variance analysis can be done at an activity, resource, work package, control account, or project
level depending on your needs.
• You can add a check box to indicate if the information needs to be escalated to the sponsor, program manager, or other appropriate individuals.
• You may want to add a field that indicates the implications of continued variance. This can include a
forecast based on a trend analysis or based on identified responses.
• In addition to tailoring the content of the variance analysis, you can tailor the presentation. Many
PMOs have reporting software that transforms the data into dashboards, heat reports, stop light
charts, or other representations.

Monitoring and Controlling Forms   203  
Alignment
The variance analysis should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Team member status reports
• Project status report
• Project schedule
• Cost estimates
• Project budget
• Issue log
• Earned value status report
• Contractor status report

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 4.3 to assist you in developing the variance analysis.
Table 4.3 Elements of Variance Analysis
Document Elements

Description

Schedule variance

Planned result

Describe the work planned to be accomplished.

Actual result

Describe the work actually accomplished.

Variance

Describe the variance.

Root cause

Identify the root cause of the variance.

Planned response

Document the planned corrective or preventive action.

Planned result

Record the planned costs for the work planned to be accomplished.

Actual result

Record the actual costs expended.

Variance

Calculate the variance.

Root cause

Identify the root cause of the variance.

Planned response

Document the planned corrective or preventive action.

Planned result

Describe the planned performance or quality measurements.

Actual result

Describe the actual performance or quality measurements.

Variance

Describe the variance.

Root cause

Identify the root cause of the variance.

Planned response

Document the planned corrective action.

Cost variance

Quality variance

VARIANCE ANALYSIS
project Title:

Date prepared:

Schedule Variance
planned result

actual result

Variance

actual result

Variance

root Cause

planned response

Cost Variance
planned result

page 1 of 2

VARIANCE ANALYSIS
root Cause

planned response

Quality Variance
planned result

actual result

root Cause

planned response

page 2 of 2

Variance

206    Monitoring and Controlling Forms

4.4 Earned Value Analysis
Earned value analysis shows specific mathematical metrics that are designed to reflect the health of the
project by integrating scope, schedule, and cost information. Information can be reported for the current
reporting period and on a cumulative basis. Earned value analysis can also be used to forecast the total
cost of the project at completion or the efficiency required to complete the project for the baseline budget.
Information that is generally collected includes:
• Budget at completion (BAC)
• Planned value (PV)
• Earned value (EV)
• Actual cost (AC)
• Schedule variance (SV)
• Cost variance (CV)
• Schedule performance index (SPI)
• Cost performance index (CPI)
• Percent planned
• Percent earned
• Percent spent
• Estimates at completion (EAC)
• To complete performance index (TCPI)
Earned value analysis is an example of a data analysis technique in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition.
The information can be provided as a standalone report or as part of the project status report. Earned
value analysis is conducted at pre-defined intervals throughout the project. It is identified as a technique in
these processes:
• 4.5 Monitor and Control Project Work
• 6.6 Control Schedule
• 7.4 Control Costs
• 12.3 Control Procurements

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor earned value analysis to meet your needs:
• The earned value analysis can be done at the control account and/or project level depending on your
needs.
• You may want to add a field that indicates the implications of continued variance. This can include a
forecast based on a trend analysis or based on identified responses.
• Several different equations can be used to calculate the EAC depending on whether the remaining work
will be completed at the budgeted rate or at the current rate. Two options are presented on this form.
• There are options to calculate a TCPI. Use the information from your project to determine the best
approach for reporting.
• You may want to add information that indicates the implications of continued schedule variance. This
can include a schedule forecast using SPI as the basis for a trend analysis or based on analyzing the
critical path.
• Some organizations are starting to embrace earned schedule metrics. You can update this form to
include various earned schedule calculations in addition to a critical path analysis.
• In addition to tailoring the content of the earned value analysis, you can tailor the presentation. Many
PMOs have reporting software that transforms the data into dashboards, control charts, S-curves, or
other representations.

Monitoring and Controlling Forms   207  
Alignment
Earned value analysis should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project status report
• Project schedule
• Project budget
• Variance analysis
• Contractor status report

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 4.4 to assist you in developing an earned value analysis.
Table 4.4 Elements of Earned Value Analysis
Document Element

Description

Planned value

Enter the value of the work planned to be accomplished.

Earned value

Enter the value of the work actually accomplished.

Actual cost

Enter the cost for the work accomplished.

Schedule variance

Calculate the schedule variance by subtracting the planned value from the earned
value. SV = EV – PV

Cost variance

Calculate the cost variance by subtracting the actual cost from the earned value.
CV = EV – AC

Schedule performance
index

Calculate the schedule performance index by dividing earned value by the planned
value. SPI = EV/PV

Cost performance index

Calculate the cost performance index by dividing the earned value by the actual cost.
CPI = EV/AC

Root cause of schedule
variance

Identify the root cause of the schedule variance.

Schedule impact

Describe the impact on deliverables, milestones, or critical path.

Root cause of cost variance Identify the root cause of the cost variance.
Budget impact

Describe the impact on the project budget, contingency funds and reserves, and any
intended actions to address the variance.

Percent planned

Indicate the cumulative percent of the work planned to be accomplished. PV/BAC

Percent earned

Indicate the cumulative percent of work that has been accomplished. EV/BAC

Percent spent

Indicate the total costs spent to accomplish the work. AC/BAC

Estimates at completion

Determine an appropriate method to forecast the total expenditures at the project completion. Calculate the forecast and justify the reason for selecting the particular estimate
at completion. For example:
If the CPI is expected to remain the same for the remainder of the project: EAC = BAC/CPI
If both the CPI and SPI will influence the remaining work: EAC = AC + [(BAC – EV)/(CPI
× SPI)]

To complete performance
index

Calculate the work remaining divided by the funds remaining.
TCPI = (BAC – EV)/(BAC – AC) to complete on plan, or
TCPI = (BAC – EV)/(EAC – AC) to complete the current EAC.

EARNED VALUE ANALYSIS REPORT
project Title:

Date prepared:

budget at Completion (baC):

overall Status:
Current Reporting
Period

Planned value (PV)
Earned value (EV)
Actual cost (AC)
Schedule variance (SV)
Cost variance (CV)
Schedule performance index (SPI)
Cost performance index (CPI)
Root Cause of Schedule Variance:

Schedule Impact:

Root Cause of Cost Variance:

Budget Impact:

Percent planned
Percent earned
Percent spent
estimates at Completion (eaC):
EAC w/CPI [BAC/CPI]
EAC w/ CPI*SPI [AC + ((BAC - EV)/
(CPI*SPI))]
Selected EAC, Justification,
and Explanation

To complete performance index (TCPI)
page 1 of 1

Current Period
Cumulative

Past Period
Cumulative

Monitoring and Controlling Forms   209  

4.5 Risk Audit
Risk audits are used to evaluate the effectiveness of the risk identification, risk responses, and risk management process as a whole. Information reviewed in a risk audit can include:
• Risk event audits
○○ Risk events
○○ Causes
○○ Responses
• Risk response audits
○○ Risk event
○○ Responses
○○ Success
○○ Actions for improvement
• Risk management processes
○○ Process
○○ Compliance
○○ Tools and techniques used
• Good practices
• Areas for improvement
The risk audit is a tool used in process 11.7 Control Risks in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. It is
conducted periodically as needed.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the risk audit to meet your needs:
• To make the audit more robust you can include an assessment of the effectiveness of the risk management approach.
• Large organizations often have policies and procedures associated with project risk management.
If this is the case in your organization, include an assessment of compliance with the policies and
procedures.
• Many organizations don’t track opportunity management. You can expand the scope of the audit to
include opportunity management if appropriate.
• For larger projects you may want to include information on overall risk in addition to risk events.

Alignment
The risk audit should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Risk management plan
• Risk register
• Risk report

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 4.5 to assist you in developing the risk audit.

210    Monitoring and Controlling Forms
Table 4.5 Elements of Risk Audit
Document Element

Description

Risk event audit

Event

List the event from the risk register.

Cause

Identify the root cause of the event from the risk register.

Response

Describe the response implemented.

Comment

Discuss if there was any way to have foreseen the event and
respond to it more effectively.

Event

List the event from the risk register.

Response

List the risk response from the risk register.

Successful

Indicate if the response was successful.

Actions to improve

Identify any opportunities for improvement in risk response.

Plan risk management

Followed: Indicate if the various processes were followed as
indicated in the risk management plan.

Identify risks

Tools and techniques used: Identify tools and techniques used
in the various risk management processes and whether they
were successful.

Risk response audit

Risk management
process audit

Perform qualitative
risk analysis
Perform quantitative
risk analysis
Plan risk responses
Control risks
Description of good practices to share

Describe any practices that should be shared for use on other projects. Include any
recommendations to update and improve risk forms, templates, policies, procedures, or
processes to ensure these practices are repeatable.

Description of areas for
improvement

Describe any practices that need improvement, the improvement plan, and any followup dates or information for corrective action.

RISK AUDIT
project Title:

Date prepared:

project auditor:

audit Date:

risk event audit
event

Cause

response

Comment

response

Successful

actions to improve

risk response audit
event

risk Management process audit
process

Followed

Tools and Techniques used

Plan Risk Management
Identify Risks
Perform Qualitative Assessment
Perform Quantitative Assessment
Plan Risk Responses
Monitor and Control Risks

page 1 of 2

RISK AUDIT
Description of Good practices to Share

Description of areas for improvement

page 2 of 2

Monitoring and Controlling Forms   213  

4.6 Contractor Status Report
The contractor status report is filled out by the contractor and submitted on a regular basis to the project
manager. It tracks status for the current reporting period and provides forecasts for future reporting periods. The report also gathers information on new risks, disputes, and issues. Information can include:
• Scope performance
• Quality performance
• Schedule performance
• Cost performance
• Forecasted performance
• Claims or disputes
• Risks
• Preventive or corrective action
• Issues
This information is generally included in the project status report compiled by the project manager.
The contractor status report is an example of work performance information identified in 12.3 Control
Procurements in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition. This report is submitted at pre-defined intervals
throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the contractor status report to meet your needs:
• You can add a field for escalations to identify those areas that need to be escalated to the sponsor,
program manager, contracting officer, or other appropriate individuals.
• If there were any contract change requests that were submitted during the reporting period, summary information should be described in the contractor status report.
• In addition to tailoring the content of the contractor status report, you can tailor the presentation.
Many PMOs have reporting software that transforms the data into dashboards, heat reports, stop
light charts, or other representations.

Alignment
The contractor status report should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Procurement management plan
• Project schedule
• Cost estimates
• Project budget
• Variance analysis
• Earned value status report
• Project status report

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 4.6 to assist you in developing the contractor status report.

214    Monitoring and Controlling Forms
Table 4.6 Elements of a Contractor Status Report
Document Element

Description

Scope performance this reporting period

Describe progress on scope made during this reporting period.

Quality performance this reporting period

Identify any quality or performance variances.

Schedule performance this reporting period

Describe whether the contract is on schedule. If ahead or behind,
identify the cause of the variance.

Cost performance this reporting period

Describe whether the contract is on budget. If over or under
budget, identify the cause of the variance.

Forecast performance for future reporting
periods

Discuss the estimated delivery date and final cost of the contract.
If the contract is a fixed price, do not enter cost forecasts.

Claims or disputes

Identify any new or resolved disputes or claims that have occurred
during the current reporting period.

Risks

List any risks. Risks should also be in the risk register.

Planned corrective or preventive action

Identify planned corrective or preventive actions necessary to
recover schedule, cost, scope, or quality variances.

Issues

Identify any new issues that have arisen. These should also be
entered in the issue log.

Comments

Add any comments that will add relevance to the report.

CONTRACTOR STATUS REPORT
project Title:

Date prepared:

Vendor:

Contract #:

Scope performance This reporting period

Quality performance This reporting period

Schedule performance This reporting period

page 1 of 3

CONTRACTOR STATUS REPORT
Cost performance This reporting period

Forecast performance for Future reporting periods

Claims or Disputes

risks

page 2 of 3

CONTRACTOR STATUS REPORT
planned Corrective or preventive action

issues

Comments

page 3 of 3

218    Monitoring and Controlling Forms

4.7 Procurement Audit
The procurement audit is the review of contracts and contracting processes for completeness, accuracy,
and effectiveness. Information in the audit can be used to improve the process and results on the current
procurement or on other contracts. Information recorded in the audit includes:
• Vendor performance audit
○○ Scope
○○ Quality
○○ Schedule
○○ Cost
○○ Other information
• Procurement management process audit
○○ Process
○○ Tools and techniques used
• Description of good practices
• Description of areas for improvement
The procurement audit is a technique from process 12.3 Control Procurements in the PMBOK® Guide –
Sixth Edition. It is conducted periodically throughout the project, or as needed.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the procurement audit to meet your needs:
• Add qualitative information, such as how easy the vendor was to work with, timeliness of returning calls, and collaborative attitude. This can provide useful information for future procurement
opportunities.

Alignment
The procurement audit should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Procurement management plan
• Contractor status report
• Contract closeout report

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 4.7 to assist you in developing the procurement audit.

Monitoring and Controlling Forms   219  
Table 4.7 Elements of a Procurement Audit
Document Element

Description

What worked well

Scope

Describe aspects of contract scope that were handled well.

Quality

Describe aspects of product quality that were handled well.

Schedule

Describe aspects of the contract schedule that were handled well.

Cost

Describe aspects of the contract budget that were handled well.

Other

Describe any other aspects of the contract or procurement that
were handled well.

Scope

Describe aspects of contract scope that could be improved.

Quality

Describe aspects of product quality that could be improved.

Schedule

Describe aspects of the contract schedule that could be improved.

Cost

Describe aspects of the contract budget that could be improved.

Other

Describe any other aspects of the contract or procurement that
could be improved.

Plan
procurements

Indicate if each procureDescribe any tools or techniques that
ment was followed or not. were effective for each procurement.

What can be improved

Procurement management
process audit

Conduct
procurements
Control
procurements
Good practices to share

Describe any good practices that can be shared with other projects or that should be
incorporated into organization policies, procedures, or processes. Include information
on lessons learned.

Areas for improvement

Describe any areas that should be improved with the procurement process. Include
information that should be incorporated into policies, procedures, or processes.
Include information on lessons learned.

PROCUREMENT AUDIT
project Title:

Date prepared:

project auditor:

audit Date:

Vendor performance audit
What Worked Well:
Scope
Quality
Schedule
Cost
other
What Can be improved:
Scope
Quality
Schedule
Cost
other
procurement Management process audit
process

Followed

Tools and Techniques used

Plan Procurements
Conduct Procurements
Control Procurements

page 1 of 2

PROCUREMENT AUDIT
Description of Good practices to Share

Description of areas for improvement

page 2 of 2

222    Monitoring and Controlling Forms

4.8 Contract Closeout Report
Contract closeout involves documenting the vendor performance so that the information can be used
to evaluate the vendor for future work. Contract closure supports the project closure process and helps
ensure contractual agreements are completed or terminated. Before a contract can be fully closed or terminated, all disputes must be resolved, the product or result must be accepted, and the final payments
must be made. Information recorded as part of closing out a contract includes:
• Vendor performance analysis
○○ Scope
○○ Quality
○○ Schedule
○○ Cost
○○ Other information, such as how easy the vendor was to work with
• Record of contract changes
○○ Change ID
○○ Description of change
○○ Date approved
• Record of contract disputes
○○ Description of dispute
○○ Resolution
○○ Date resolved
The date of contract completion, who signed off on it, and the date of the final payment are other elements that should be recorded.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the contract closeout report to meet your needs:
• For a small contract you can combine all the information in a vendor performance analysis into a
summary paragraph.
• For small contracts you may not need information on contract changes or contract disputes.
• If the project was based around one large contract, you can combine the information in the project
closeout report with this form.

Alignment
The contract closeout report should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Procurement management plan
• Procurement audit
• Change log
• Project closeout

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 4.8 to assist you in developing the contract closeout report.

Monitoring and Controlling Forms   223  
Table 4.8 Elements of a Contract Closeout
Document Element

Description

What worked well

Scope

Describe aspects of contract scope that were handled well.

Quality

Describe aspects of product quality that were handled well.

Schedule

Describe aspects of the contract schedule that were handled well.

Cost

Describe aspects of the contract budget that were handled well.

Other

Describe any other aspects of the contract or procurement that were
handled well.

Scope

Describe aspects of contract scope that could be improved.

Quality

Describe aspects of product quality that could be improved.

Schedule

Describe aspects of the contract schedule that could be improved.

Cost

Describe aspects of the contract budget that could be improved.

Other

Describe any other aspects of the contract or procurement that
could be improved.

Change ID

Enter the change identifier from the change log.

Change
description

Enter the description from the change log.

Date
approved

Enter the date approved from the change log.

Description

Describe the dispute or claim.

Resolution

Describe the resolution.

Date resolved

Enter the date the dispute or claim was resolved.

What can be improved

Record of contract changes

Record of contract disputes

CONTRACT CLOSEOUT
project Title:

Date prepared:

project Manager:

Contract representative:

Vendor performance analysis
What Worked Well:
Scope
Quality
Schedule
Cost
other
What Can be improved:
Scope
Quality
Schedule
Cost
other
record of Contract Changes
Change iD

Change Description

page 1 of 2

Date approved

CONTRACT CLOSEOUT
record of Contract Disputes
Description

resolution

Date resolved

Date of Contract Completion
Signed Off by
Date of Final Payment

page 2 of 2

226    Monitoring and Controlling Forms

4.9 Product Acceptance FORM
Product acceptance should be done periodically throughout the project as each deliverable or component
is validated and accepted.
The product acceptance form can include this information:
• Identifier
• Requirement
• Acceptance criteria
• Method of validation
• Status
• Sign-off
Product acceptance is part of process 5.5 Validate Scope in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition.
Product acceptance should be done periodically throughout the project life cycle.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the product acceptance form to meet your needs:
• For a small project with only a few deliverables you may not need this form.
• You can add a column to indicate the verification method used to prove that the deliverables meet
the requirements. In this instance it becomes a product verification, validation, and acceptance form.

Alignment
The product acceptance form should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Scope management plan
• Requirements documentation
• Requirements traceability matrix
• Quality management plan

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 4.9 to assist you in developing the product acceptance
form.
Table 4.9 Elements of Product Acceptance
Document Element

Description

ID

Enter a unique requirement identifier from the requirements documentation.

Requirement

Enter the requirement description from the requirements documentation.

Acceptance criteria

Enter the criteria for acceptance.

Validation method

Describe the method of validating the requirement meets the stakeholder’s needs.

Status

Document whether the requirement or deliverable was accepted or not.

Sign-off

Obtain the signature of the party accepting the product.

iD

project Title:

requirement

acceptance Criteria

page 1 of 1

Validation Method

Date prepared:

Status

FORMAL ACCEPTANCE FORM

Comments

Sign-off

Closing

5

5.0 CloSING ProCeSS GrouP
The purpose of the Closing Process Group is to complete the project work, product work, and project
phases in an orderly manner. There is one process in the Closing Process Group:
• Close Project or Phase
The intent of the Closing Process Group is to at least:
• Close project phases
• Close the project
• Document lessons learned
• Document final project results
• Archive project records
• Ensure the work necessary to close contracts is complete
As the final process in a phase or project, this process ensures an organized and efficient completion
of deliverables, phases, and the project as a whole.
The forms used to document project closure include:
• Lessons learned
• Project closeout

5.1 leSSoNS leArNeD SuMMArY
Lessons learned are compiled throughout the project or at specific intervals, such as at the end of a life
cycle phase. These are recorded in the lessons learned register. The lessons learned summary compiles
and organizes those things that the project team did that worked very well and should be passed along
to other project teams, and identifies those things that should be improved for future project work. The

230   Closing
summary should include information on risks, issues, procurements, quality defects, and any areas of poor
or outstanding performance. Information that can be documented includes:
• Project performance analysis
○○ Requirements
○○ Scope
○○ Schedule
○○ Cost
○○ Quality
○○ Physical resources
○○ Team resources
○○ Communication
○○ Reporting
○○ Risk management
○○ Procurement management
○○ Stakeholder management
○○ Process improvement
○○ Product-specific information
• Information on specific risks
• Quality defects
• Vendor management
• Areas of exceptional performance
• Areas for improvement
This information is saved, along with the lessons learned register, in a lessons learned repository.
Repositories can be as simple as a lessons learned binder, or they can be a searchable database, or anything in between. The purpose is to improve performance on the current project (if done during the project)
and future projects. Use the information from your project to tailor the form to best meet your needs. The
lessons learned summary supports process 4.7 Close Project or Phase in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth
Edition. It is developed at the close of a phase for long projects and at the close of the project for shorter
projects.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the lessons learned summary to meet your needs:
• Add, combine, or eliminate rows as needed to capture the important aspects of your project.
• Consider including a section on change management, as that can sometimes be a challenging
aspect of projects to manage.
• You may want to include a section on phase management if you are doing the summary at the end
of the project.
• Integration management is an important aspect for projects that are part of a program or for projects
that have multiple organizations working on one project.
• If your project used a new development approach, such as a blended predictive and adaptive (agile)
approach, consider adding some relevant lessons learned.

Closing   231  
Alignment
The lessons learned summary should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Issue register
• Risk register
• Decision log
• Lessons learned register
• Retrospectives

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 5.1 to assist you in developing the lessons learned
summary.
Table 5.1 Elements of a Lessons Learned Summary
Document Element

Description

Project Performance

What Worked Well

What Can Be Improved

Requirements definition
and management

List any practices or incidents that
were effective in defining and managing
requirements.

List any practices or incidents that can
be improved in defining and managing
requirements.

Scope definition and
management

List any practices or incidents that were
effective in defining and managing scope.

List any practices or incidents that can be
improved in defining and managing scope.

Schedule development
and control

List any practices or incidents that were
effective in developing and controlling the
schedule.

List any practices or incidents that can be
improved in developing and controlling the
schedule.

Cost estimating and
control

List any practices or incidents that were
effective in developing estimates and
controlling costs.

List any practices or incidents that can be
improved in developing estimates and controlling costs.

Quality planning and
control

List any practices or incidents that were
effective in planning, managing, and
controlling quality.

List any practices or incidents that can
be improved in planning, managing, and
controlling quality. Specific defects are
addressed elsewhere.

Physical resource planning and control

List any practices or incidents that were
List any practices or incidents that can be
effective in planning, acquiring, and manag- improved in planning, acquiring, and managing physical resources.
ing physical resources.

Team planning, develop- List any practices or incidents that were
ment, and performance effective in working with team members
and developing and managing the team.

List any practices or incidents that can be
improved in working with team members and
developing and managing the team.

Communications
management

List any practices or incidents that were
effective in planning and distributing
information.

List any practices or incidents that can
be improved in planning and distributing
information.

Reporting

List any practices or incidents that were
effective in reporting project performance.

List any practices or incidents that can be
improved in reporting project performance.

Risk management

List any practices or incidents that were
effective in the risk management process.
Specific risks are addressed elsewhere.

List any practices or incidents that can be
improved in the risk management process.
Specific risks are addressed elsewhere.
(continued)

232   Closing
Table 5.1 Elements of a Lessons Learned Summary (continued)
Document Element

Description

Project Performance

What Worked Well

What Can Be Improved

Procurement planning
and management

List any practices or incidents that were
effective in planning, conducting, and
administering contracts.

List any practices or incidents that can
be improved in planning, conducting, and
administering contracts.

Stakeholder engagement List any practices or incidents that were
effective in engaging stakeholders.

List any practices or incidents that can be
improved in engaging stakeholders.

Process improvement
information

List any processes that were developed
that should be continued.

List any processes that should be changed
or discontinued.

Product-specific
information

List any practices or incidents that were
effective in delivering the specific product,
service, or result.

List any practices or incidents that can be
improved in delivering the specific product,
service, or result.

Other

List any other practices or incidents that
were effective, such as change control,
configuration management, etc.

List any other practices or incidents that can
be improved, such as change control, configuration management, etc.

Risks and issues

Risk or issue description

Identify risks or issues that occurred that
should be considered to improve organizational learning.

Response

Describe the response and its effectiveness.

Comments

Provide any additional information needed to
improve future project performance.

Defect description

Describe quality defects that should be
considered to improve organizational
effectiveness.

Resolution

Describe how the defects were resolved.

Comments

Indicate what should be done to improve
future project performance.

Vendor

List the vendor(s).

Issue

Describe any issues, claims, or disputes that
occurred.

Resolution

Describe the outcome or resolution.

Comments

Indicate what should be done to improve
future vendor management performance.

Areas of exceptional performance

Identify areas of exceptional performance
that can be passed on to other teams.

Areas for improvement

Identify areas that can be improved on for
future performance.

Quality defects

Vendor management

Other

LESSONS LEARNED SUMMARY
Project Title:

Date Prepared:

Project Performance Analysis
What Worked Well
Requirements definition and management
Scope definition and management
Schedule development and control
Cost estimating and control
Quality planning and control
Physical resource planning and control
Team planning, development, and performance
Communications management
Reporting
Risk management
Procurement planning and management
Stakeholder engagement
Process improvement information
Product-specific information
Other

Page 1 of 2

What Can be Improved

other

Issue

Areas of exceptional Performance

Vendor

Vendor Management

Defect Description

Quality Defects

risk or Issue Description

risks and Issues

Page 2 of 2

resolution

response

Comments

Comments

Comments

Areas for Improvement

resolution

LESSONS LEARNED SUMMARY

Closing   235  

5.2 Project or Phase Closeout
Project closeout involves documenting the final project performance as compared to the project objectives. The objectives from the project charter are reviewed and evidence of meeting them is documented. If
an objective was not met, or if there is a variance, that is documented as well. In addition, information from
the procurement closeout is documented. Information documented includes:
• Project or phase description
• Project or phase objectives
• Completion criteria
• How met
• Cost and schedule variances
• Benefits management
• Business needs
• Summary of risks and issues
Use the information from your project to determine the best approach.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the project or phase closeout to meet your needs:
• When working with an incremental life cycle or agile development method, the delivery of a major
end item, service, or capability may benefit from a formal phase closeout report.
• For projects that are part of a program you should tailor the content to meet the needs of the
program.

Alignment
The project or phase closeout should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Project management plan (all components)
• Product acceptance
• Lessons learned summary
The project closeout form supports process 4.7 Close Project or Phase in the PMBOK® Guide – Sixth
Edition.

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 5.2 to assist you in developing the project or phase
closeout.

236   Closing
Table 5.2 Elements of a Project or Phase Closeout
Document Element

Description

Project description

Provide a summary level description of the project.

Performance summary

Scope

Describe the scope objectives needed to achieve
the planned benefits of the project.
Document the specific and measurable criteria
needed to complete the scope objectives.
Provide evidence that the completion criteria
were met.

Quality

Describe the quality objectives and criteria needed
to achieve the planned benefits of the project.
Document the specific and measurable criteria
needed to meet the product and project quality
objectives.
Enter the verification and validation information from
the product acceptance form.

Variances

Document the time and cost objectives and the final completion date and final
expenditures. Explain any variances.

Benefits management

Describe how the final product, service, or result achieved the benefits the project
was undertaken to address.

Business needs

Describe how the final product, service, or result achieved the business needs
identified in the business plan.

Risks and issues

Summarize any significant risks or issues, or the overall risk exposure, and
describe the response and resolution strategies.

Project Description

Project Title:

Page 1 of 2

Date Prepared:

PROJECT CLOSEOUT
Project Manager:

risk or Issue

risks and Issues

business Needs

benefits Management

Cost

Time

Variances

Quality

Scope

Performance Summary

Variances

Completion Criteria

Page 2 of 2

response or resolution

objectives/Final outcome

objectives

PROJECT CLOSEOUT

Comments

Comments

how Met

Agile

6

New to this edition of A Project Manager’s Book of Forms is a section with a few forms that can be used
to apply agile techniques to your project. Many projects that use an agile development method have software that organizes and drives the work. Another method of organizing and tracking work in agile projects
is by creating visual displays such as Kanban Boards to enable everyone to see the status of work in progress. Thus, there are not that many forms that are produced in traditional office software.
Some of the techniques used in agile development methods can be easily translated into a traditional
form. The following forms are included and can be tailored for use in any project, regardless of the development method used:
• Project vision
• Backlog
• Release plan
• Retrospective
The PMBOK® Guide – Sixth Edition does not list these forms as outputs of any processes. The following
table indicates the processes where they might be most useful.
Project Vision

Develop project charter.
This form may be used prior to developing a charter, or, for smaller projects, instead of
a charter.

Backlog

Collect requirements.
The backlog can be used in place of or in addition to the requirements documentation.

Release Plan

Plan schedule management.
The release plan is a high-level schedule. It may take the place of a schedule management
plan or a high-level schedule for agile teams on small projects.

Retrospective

Manage project knowledge.
The retrospective can take the place of or work in parallel with the lessons learned register.

240   Agile

6.1 Product Vision
The product vision provides the future view of the product being developed. The product vision is aspirational, yet achievable and realistic. It is developed at the very beginning of a project. It is often an input to
the business case.
The product vision includes at least:
• Target customer
• Needs
• Product and key attributes
• Key benefits
The product vision is often used in place of a project charter on agile-based projects. It is developed
once, at the beginning of the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the product vision to meet your needs:
• Document the business goals that the product is aligned to.
• Identify key competitors and how this product will be better.
• Describe what differentiates this product from similar products in the market.
• You can combine all the information into a sentence or two, or you can follow a formula like the one
shown in the sample form.

Alignment
The product vision should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Product backlog
• Roadmap
• Release plan

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 6.1 to assist you in developing the product vision.
TABLE 6.1 Elements of a Product Vision
Document Element

Description

Target customer

The person or group who will buy or use the product.

Needs

The needs or requirements that the product will address.

Product and key attributes

A description of the product that includes attributes, functional and nonfunctional
requirements, and top-level requirements.

Key benefit

Describes why the customer would buy the product.

PRODUCT VISION
Project title:

date Prepared:

We are developing this product for

.

To respond to the following need(s):
•
•
•
This product responds to those needs by providing the following:
•
•
•
•
Customers will buy this product because:
•
•
•
•

Page 1 of 1

242   Agile

6.2 Product Backlog
The product backlog is developed at the very beginning of a project. It is often developed in conjunction
with the product vision. The product backlog keeps track of all the requirements along with their priority
and the release they will be incorporated into.
The product backlog includes at least:
• ID
• Summary description
• Priority
• Story
• Status
The product backlog is used to document and prioritize the requirements, features, functions, and user
stories for releases or sprints. It is developed at the start of the project and is updated throughout the project.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the product backlog to meet your needs:
• You can add estimating information such as story points.
• To provide more detail you can indicate which sprint a feature or function will be incorporated into.
• You may want to indicate the user type that will benefit from the requirement, such as customer,
administrator, manager, etc.
• For large projects it helps to categorize requirements, so having a column that indicates the category
can be useful.

Alignment
The backlog should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Product vision
• Roadmap
• Release plan

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 6.2 to assist you in developing the product backlog.
TABLE 6.2 Elements of a Product Backlog
Document Element

Description

ID

A unique identifier

Summary description

A brief description of the requirement or need. The description should be no more than one
or two sentences.

Priority

A way of prioritizing or ranking the requirements. This can be in summary groups, such as
high, medium and low, or it can be numbered 1, 2, 3.

Story

This field can either be a user story that is prioritized, or it can indicate the name of a user
story that is recorded elsewhere.

Status

Indicates if the requirement is not started, in progress, or complete.

id

Project title:

summary description

Page 1 of 1

Priority

date Prepared:

PRODUCT BACKLOG
story

status

244   Agile

6.3 Release Plan
The release plan is similar to a roadmap. It functions as a high-level schedule that indicates which release
each requirement or user story will be assigned to. The elements in a particular release can be updated
based on the relative priority of the requirements in the backlog and the availability of resources needed to
work on the specific requirements.
The release plan includes at least:
• Release dates
• User stories or requirements from the backlog
The release plan can be further elaborated into sprints. Each release may have multiple sprints. Once
a sprint starts, the requirements or user stories in the sprint cannot be changed. A high-level release plan
may be developed after the product vision and backlog are started; however, it will remain somewhat
dynamic throughout the project as priorities shift and new requirements are identified. The sequence and
priorities of requirements or user stories may be updated after each sprint to reflect changing needs based
on performance feedback or customer needs.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the release plan to meet your needs:
• As information in the release plan gets more concrete you may want to assign requirements or user
stories to specific sprints in the release.
• You can arrange the release plan in swim lanes, with each lane assigned to a specific team or work
stream.
• If you show the release plan with a timeline you can show the relationships between various user
stories or features. This blends the information about the content of each release with the schedule
information.

Alignment
The release plan should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Product vision
• Roadmap
• Product backlog

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 6.3 to assist you in developing the release plan.
Table 6.3 Elements of a Release Plan
Document Element

Description

Release dates

Either a timeline or a milestone indicator of when releases start and finish. This can be
more detailed to show a linear schedule that indicates the duration of each release.

User stories

The requirements or user stories from the backlog

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

Sprint 2

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

Sprint 3

This diagram assumes that different shades notes indicate different categories of user stories.

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

Sprint 1

Release Goal: Describe the goal of the release in this space.

User
Story

RELEASE PLAN

Project Name: ____________________________________________

Team 1

Team 2

Team 3

Team 4

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

User
Story

Sprint 4

246   Agile

6.4 Retrospective
The retrospective is an activity that is performed at the end of every sprint. The information is usually
recorded on sticky notes or recorded in software. A common retrospective approach is called a “starfish.”
The starfish retrospective collects the following information:
• Start
• Stop
• Keep
• More
• Less
The intent of a retrospective is to improve the performance of the team and make them more efficient
in each subsequent sprint.

Tailoring Tips
Consider the following tips to help tailor the retrospective to meet your needs:
• Instead of a starfish approach you can use “FLAP,” which stands for Future Considerations, Lessons,
Accomplishments, and Problems.
• You can color code information to indicate a category, such as technical, process, people, environment, etc.

Alignment
The retrospective should be aligned and consistent with the following documents:
• Lessons learned summary
• Project closeout

Description
You can use the element descriptions in Table 6.4 to assist you in developing the retrospective.
Table 6.4 Elements of a Retrospective
Document Element

Description

Start

Actions and behaviors that the team will begin to implement

Stop

Actions or behaviors that the team will cease doing

Keep

Practices that the team should continue with

More

Practices that were not done consistently that should be done more often

Less

Practices that were done too much or that should be reduced

start

Project title:
stop

Page 1 of 1

keep

date Prepared:

RETROSPECTIVE
More

Less

Retrospective
More Of

Keep Doing

Less Of

Start Doing

Stop Doing

Index
Note: Page numbers followed by t denote tables; page numbers in italics denote the blank copy of the form.
A
Acceptance forms. See Product acceptance form;
Product verification, validation, and acceptance
form
Activity attributes, 62–63, 63t, 64
Activity cost estimates, 82, 86t, 87. See also
Cost estimates
Activity duration estimates. See Duration estimates
Activity management
Activity list, 59–60, 60t, 61
attributes, 62–63, 63t, 64
durations, 70, 74
resources, 113, 116
Activity resource requirements. See Resource
requirements
Agile development method, 239–248
overview, viii, 239, 239t
Product backlog, 242, 242t, 243
Product vision, 240, 240t, 241
Release plan, 244, 244t, 245
Retrospective, 239t, 246, 246t, 247–248
Analogous estimates, 70, 73, 75t, 77,85, 88, 89t, 91
Assumption log, 9–10, 10t, 11,63, 148, 151
Authorization of projects, 3–4t, 4–8,45, 235, 240
B
Backlogs for products, 59, 63, 239t, 242, 242t, 243
Baselines
for cost, 20, 22t, 24,93, 94
for performance measurement, 20, 82, 83t,
84,93
for schedules, 20, 22t, 24
for scope, 20, 22t, 24,37, 49, 52–53
Beta distribution/Beta distribution equation
(three-point estimate), 70, 73, 75–76t, 77,
85, 88, 89t, 91
Bottom-up estimates, 88, 90t, 92
Breakdown of project work
resources, 116, 117
Work breakdown structure (WBS),
49–53, 50t, 51,52, 54t, 55
Budget at completion. See Earned value analysis
Bug fix documentation, 175

C
Change log, 175, 176t, 177
Change management plan, 25–26, 26t, 27
Change requests, 170, 171t, 172–174,175,
196, 213
Change audit, 181
Charter, 2–3, 3–4t, 5–8,45, 235, 240
Closing process, 229–238
Closing process group, 229
Lessons learned summary, 229–231, 231–232t,
233–234
Project (phase) closeout, 222, 235, 236t,
237–238
purpose, 229
Communications management plan, 118–119,
119t, 121
Competency review, 184, 185t
Component relationships, 67–68, 69
Configuration management, 25, 175
Constraints, 9–10, 10t, ,62, 148, 151
Contingency reserve, 70, 85, 93
Contract change requests, 213
Contract closeout report, 222, 223t,
224–225
Contractor status report, 213, 214t,
216–217
Contracts and contracting process
changes, 213
closing report, 222, 223t, 224–225
disputes, 222, 223t, 225
procurement audits, 218, 219t, 220–221
project charter and, 2–3, 3–4t, 5–8,45, 235, 240
resource management, 82, 104–105, 106,
109–110
status report, 213, 214t, 216–217
Control accounts, 50t, 51,52
Control forms. See Monitoring and control forms
Control quality phase, 99
Cost estimates
Activity cost estimates, 82, 86t, 87
Cost estimating worksheet, 88, 89t, 90t, 91–92
Cost estimation equation, 88, 89t
overview, 85–86

250    Index
Cost management
baselines, 20, 22t, 24,93, 94
Cost management plan, 82–83, 83t, 84
cumulative cost curve, 93
earned value analysis, 56, 82, 93, 206–207,
207t, 208
estimations of, 85–88, 86t, 87,89–90t,
91–92
plan for, 82–83, 83t, 84
status report, 121, 191, 196–197, 198t,
199–201,213
variance analysis, 202–203, 203t,
204–205,206–207, 207t, 208
Cost performance index (CPI), 207t, 208
Cumulative cost curve, 93

Lessons learned register, 178, 179t, 180,191,
229, 230
Quality audit, 181, 182t, 183
Team performance assessment, 184, 185t,
186–188
Executing process group, 163–164

D
Decision log, 9, 168, 168t, 169,196
Disputes, contract, 222, 223t, 225
Documentation. See Project documentation
Duration estimates
Duration estimating worksheet, 73–74,
75–76t, 77
duration estimation equation, 73, 75t
overview, 70–71, 71t, 72

I
Indexes, performance, 207t, 208
Initiating forms, 1–16
Assumption log, 9–10, 10t, 11,63, 148
Initiating process group, 1
Project charter, 2–3, 3–4t, 5–8,45,
235, 240
purpose, 1
Stakeholder analysis, 12, 15, 15t, 16
Stakeholder register, 12–13, 13t, 14, 15
Initiating process group, 1
Interpersonal competencies, 184, 185t
Inter-requirements traceability matrix, 40, 42t
Issue log, 9, 165, 166t, 167
Issues, defined, 165
Iterations plans, 45

E
Earned value analysis, 206–207, 207t, 208
Earned value management (EVM), 56, 82
Earned value measurements, 93
Effort hours, 70, 73
Electronic copies of forms, ix
Equations
beta distribution (three-point estimate), 73,
76t, 88
cost estimation, 88, 89t
duration estimation, 73, 75t
weighting, 76t, 89t
Estimations
of cost, 86t, 87, 89–90t, 91–92
of duration, 70–74, 71t, 72, 75–76t, 77
methods, 70, 73, 75t, 77,85, 88, 89–90t, 91–92
of resources, 113
Executing forms, 163–164
Change log, 175, 176t, 177
Change request, 170, 171t, 172–174,175,
196, 213
Decision log, 9, 168, 168t, 169,196
Executing process group, 163–164
Issue log, 9, 165, 166t, 167

F
Finish-to-finish (FF) relationships, 67
Finish-to-start (FS) relationships, 67
FLAP approach, 246
Forecasting costs, 207t, 208
G
Gantt charts, 78, 80

L
Lag, 67
Lead, 67
Lessons learned register, 178, 179t, 180,191, 229,
230
Lessons learned repository, 230
Lessons learned summary, 229–231, 231–232t,
233–234
Life cycle phase predictions, 28, 29
Location management, 118, 155
Logs
Assumption Log, 9–10, 10t, 11,63, 148
backlogs for products, 63, 239t, 242,
242t, 243
Change log, 175, 176t, 177
Decision log, 9, 168, 168t, 169,196
Issue log, 9, 165, 166t, 167

Index   251  
M
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK®
Guide) – Sixth Edition. See PMBOK
Guide – Sixth Edition
Management reserve, 93
Milestone chart, 79, 81
Milestone list, 65, 65t, 66
Monitoring and control forms, 189–228
Change request, 170, 171t, 172–174,175,
196, 213
Contract closeout report, 222, 223t, 224–225
Contractor status report, 213, 214t, 215–217
Earned value analysis, 206–207, 207t, 208
Monitoring and controlling process group,
189–190
Procurement audit, 218, 219t, 220–221
Product acceptance form, 226, 226t, 227
Project status report, 121, 191, 196–197, 198t,
199–201,213
purpose, 189–190
Risk audit, 209, 210t, 211–212
Team member status report, 191–192,
192t, 193–195,196
Variance analysis reports, 202–203, 203t,
204–205
Monitoring and controlling process group,
189–190
N
Name, of activities. See Activity attributes
Network diagram, 67–68, 69
Nonlinear numbering structure, 142
O
Opportunity management, 209
Outside contractors, 104
P
Parametric estimates, 70, 73, 75t, 77,85, 88, 89t,
91t
Participation, levels of, 101, 102t, 103
Performance reports
Earned value analysis, 206–207, 207t, 208
Performance indexes, 207t, 208
Performance measurement baseline, 20, 83t,
84,93
project status, 121, 191, 196–197, 198t,
199–201, 213
for team members, 191–192, 192t, 193–195,196
on team performance, 184, 185t, 186–188

Planning forms, 17–19
Activity attributes, 62–63, 63t, 64
Activity list, 59–60, 60t, 61
Change management plan, 25–26, 27t, 27
Communications management plan, 118–119,
119t, 121
Cost baseline, 20, 22t, 24,93, 94
Cost estimates, 85–86, 86t, 87
Cost estimating worksheet, 88, 89t, 90t, 91–92
Cost management plan, 82–83, 83t, 84
Duration estimates, 70–71, 71t, 72
Duration estimating worksheet, 73–74,
75–76t, 77
Milestone list, 65, 66t, 66
Network diagram, 67–68, 69
Planning process group, 17–19
Probability and impact assessment, 137,
137–139t, 140–141,142
Probability and impact matrix, 142, 143
Procurement management plan, 147–148, 149t,
150–151
Procurement strategy, 152–154, 153t, 154
Product backlog, 35, 59, 63, 239t, 242,
242t, 243
Product vision, 239t, 240, 240t, 241
Project management plan, 20–21, 21–22t,
23–24 (See also project management plan)
Project roadmap, 28–29
Project schedule, 78–79, 80–81
Project scope statement, 3, 45, 46t, 48,52
purpose, 17–19
Quality management plan, 95–96, 96t, 97–98
Quality metrics, 99, 99t, 100
Requirements documentation, 37–38, 38t, 39
Requirements management plan, 33–34, 34t,
35–36
Requirements traceability matrix, 40–41, 42t, 43
Resource breakdown structure, 116, 117
Resource management plan, 82, 104–105, 106t,
107–108
Resource requirements, 113–114, 114t, 115
Responsibility assignment matrix (RAM),
101–102, 103
Risk data sheet, 144–45, 146
Risk management plan, 121–122, 123t,
124–127,137
Risk register, 128–129, 129t, 130,142
Risk report, 131–132, 133t, 133–136
Schedule baseline, 20, 22t, 24
Schedule management plan, 56, 57t, 58

252    Index
Planning forms (continued)
Scope baseline, 20, 22t, 24, 49, 52–53
Scope management plan, 30–31, 31t, 32
Source selection criteria, 155–156, 156t, 157
Stakeholder engagement plan, 158–159, 159t,
160–161
Team charter, 109, 110t, 111–112
WBS dictionary, 52–53, 54t, 55
Work breakdown structure (WBS), 49–50, 50t,
51,52
Planning process group, 17–19
PMBOK Guide – Sixth Edition
Close project or phase (process 4.7),
230, 235
Collect requirements (process 5.2), 38, 40
Control procurements (process 12.3),
213, 218
Control risks (process 11.7), 209
Create WBS (process 5.4), 49, 53
data analysis technique, 202, 206
Define activities (process 6.2), 59, 62, 65
Define scope (process 5.3), 45
Determine budget (process 7.3), 93
Develop project charter (process 4.1), 2, 9
Develop project management plan
(process 4.2), 20
Develop schedule, 78
Develop team (process 9.4), 184
Direct and manage project work (process 4.3),
165, 170
Estimate activity durations (process 6.4),
70, 74
Estimate activity resources (process 9.2),
113, 116
Estimate costs (process 7.2), 85, 88
Identify risks (process 11.2), 131, 144
Identify stakeholders (process 13.1), 12, 15
Manage project knowledge (process 4.4), 178
Manage quality, 181
Monitor and control project work (process 4.5),
191, 196
overview, viii
Perform integrated change control (process 4.6),
175
Perform qualitative risk analysis (process 11.3),
137, 142
Plan communications management, 122
Plan cost management (process 7.1), 82
Plan procurement management (process 12.1),
147, 152

Plan quality management (process 8.1), 95
Plan resource management (process 9.1),
104, 109
Plan risk management (process 11.1), 121
Plan schedule management (process 6.1), 56
Plan scope management (process 5.1),
30, 33
Plan stakeholder engagement, 158
Sequence activities (process 6.3), 67
Validate scope (process 5.5), 226
Probability and impact assessment, 137,
138–139t, 140–141,142
Probability and impact matrix, 121, 142, 143
Procurement audit, 218, 219t, 220–221
Procurement management
audits, 218, 219t, 220–221
plans for, 147–148, 149t, 150–151
Procurement management plan, 147–148, 149t,
150–151
sources, 155–156, 156t, 157
strategies, 152–154, 153t, 154
Procurement strategy, 148, 152–154,
153t, 154
Product acceptance form, 226, 226t, 227
Product backlog, 59, 63, 239t, 242, 242,
243
Productivity rate, 73
Product verification, validation, and acceptance
form, 226
Product vision, 239t, 240, 240t, 241
Progress reports. See Status reports
Project charter, 2–3, 3–4t, 5–8,45, 235, 240
Project documentation
Agile techniques for, 239–248
closing process, 229–232 (See also Closing
process)
electronic copies, ix
executing forms, 164–188 (See also Executing
forms)
initiating forms, 1–16 (See also Initiating forms)
monitoring and control forms, 189–228 (See also
Monitoring and control forms)
overview, viii–ix
planning forms, 17–162 (See also Planning forms)
Project management plan
component forms, 30, 56, 118–119
elements, 21–22t
form, 23–24
overview, 20–21
Project roadmap, 28–29

Index   253  
Project performance report, 199–201
Project or phase closeout, 222, 235, 236t,
237–238. See also Closing process
Project roadmap, 21, 28–29
Project schedule, 78–79, 80–81
Project scope statement, 3, 45, 46t, 48,52
Project status report, 121, 191, 196–197, 198t,
199–201,213
Project vision, 239t, 240, 240t, 241
Q
Qualitative risk analysis, 137
Quality management forms
Procurement audit, 218, 219t,
220–221
Quality audit, 181, 182t, 183
Quality management plan, 95–96, 96t,
97–98
Quality metrics, 99, 99t, 100
Variance analysis reports, 202–203, 203t,
204–205
Quantitative methods, 70, 73, 85, 88
R
RACI chart, 101, 103
Release plans, 239t, 244, 244t, 245
Requirements documentation, 37–38,
38t, 39
Requirements management plan, 33–34, 34t,
35–36
Requirements traceability matrix, 40–41,
42t, 43
Resource breakdown structure, 116, 117
Resource management plan, 82, 104–105, 106t,
107–108
Resource requirements, 113–114, 114t, 115
Responsibility assignment matrix (RAM), 101,
102t, 103
Retrospective, 239t, 246, 246t,
247–248
Risk assessment, probability and impact, 121, 137,
138–139t, 140–141,142, 143
Risk audit, 209, 210t, 211–212
Risk data sheet, 144, 145t, 146
Risk management plan, 121–122, 123t,
124–127,137
Risk register, 128–129, 129t, 130,142
Risk report, 131–132, 133t, 133–136
Roadmap, 22, 28–29
Rolling wave planning, 56, 71, 86

S
Schedule management
baselines, 20, 22t, 24
Earned value analysis, 206–207, 207t, 208
Network diagrams, 67–68
plans, 30–31, 31t, 32, 35
Project status report, 121, 191, 196–197, 198t,
199–201,213
Release plans, 239t, 244, 244t, 245
Schedule management plan, 56, 57t, 58
Variance analysis reports, 202–203, 203t,
204–205
Schedule performance index (SPI), 207t,
208
Schedule tool, 59, 62, 65
Scope management
analysis, 203, 206–207, 207t, 208
baselines, 20, 22t, 24, 49, 52–53
plans, 30–31, 31t, 32, 33
statements, 3, 45, 46t, 48,52
validation, 226, 226t, 227
Source selection criteria, 155–156, 156t, 157
Stakeholder analysis, 12, 15, 15t, 16
Stakeholder engagement plan, 158–159, 159t,
160–161
Stakeholder register, 12–13, 13t, 14, 15
Stakeholder relationship map, 158
Starfish approach, 246
Start-to-finish (SF) relationships, 67
Start-to-start (SS) relationships, 67
Statement of work, 3, 52, 53, 152
Status reports
contractors, 213, 214t, 215–217
projects, 121, 191, 196–197, 198t, 199–201,
213
team members, 191–192, 192t, 193–195,
196
Subsidiary management plans, 20–21, 23
T
Team charter, 109, 110t, 111–112
Team member status report, 191–192, 192t,
193–195,196
Team performance assessment, 184, 185t,
186–188
Team resources, 113, 116
Technical competencies, 184, 185t
Three-point estimate (beta distribution), 70, 73,
75–76t, 77,85, 88, 89t, 91
Timelines, 28, 29,242

254    Index
Time-phased budget, 93
To complete performance index (TCPI), 207t, 208
V
Variance analysis reports, 202–203, 203t,
204–205
Vendors. See Contracts and contracting process
W
WBS dictionary, 30, 52–53, 54t, 55
Weighting equation, 76t, 89t

Work breakdown structure (WBS), 49–50, 50t,
51,52
Work package, 49, 50t, 51,52
Work performance reports
Earned value analysis, 206–207, 207t,
208
project status, 121, 191, 196–197, 198t,
199–201, 213
for team members, 191–192, 192t, 193–195,196
on team performance, 184, 185t,
186–188

